This guide explains the processes used to make Keynote documents. Keynote is Apple Inc.’s equivalent to Microsoft’s
Powerpoint. Keynote’s strength is its ease of use and its ability to handle a variety of media types, including HD Video.
This guide to Keynote is one of three books I have written for Bookboon on iWork. My books on Pages and Numbers
complement this one, with some areas of repetition, each guide is designed to stand alone.
A great way to learn is to experiment and play. Use this guide to focus your learning on specific areas of Keynote before
taking a broad view of the myriad of possibilities for this software.
This guide describes ways to assemble and edit content. It does not seek to give advice on presentation methodology, too
often business presentations suffer from densely packed slides, with too much text and statistical information squeezed
into them; information that is best left for a report. Rather than cram the contents of a report onto a handful of slides,
judicious planning will make for compelling presentations. Keynote is not a place to copy and paste all the text of a report.
It is far better to highlight and illustrate important points using Keynote’s excellent graphic and animation capabilities. That
said, animation and graphic elements should be used sparingly to aid the communication, and not as a distraction to it.
Keynote can be used to create dynamic and engaging presentations. Text, images and charts can be arranged with ease.
Keynote makes it easy to add audio and video, add transitions between slides, animate data, and then share presentations
in a variety of ways.
The guide describes software functions and outlines generic examples of the software in use. Further information can be
found on Apple’s web pages, or via Apple’s Certified Training Scheme.
Regarding keyboard shortcuts. The keyboard shortcuts mentioned in this book will work on International English
QWERTY keyboards. For US keyboards the only difference is that Alt key (􀀂 ) is called Option (􀀂 ). For AZERTY and
other language keywords please try the shortcuts, they will probably work.
For seasoned Mac users please note that the Apple key is now referred to as the Command key. It is labelled cmd , not .
There are three ways to launch Keynote.
• Go to your Applications folder. In Finder choose Go > Applications. Open the iWork ’09 folder and double–
click the Keynote icon. (Unless you have done a customized iWork installation the iWork folder will be in the
Application folder found in the root of your primary hard drive.)
• In the Dock, click the Keynote icon. (In Apple’s latest operating system named Lion, a Keynote icon will appear
in Launchpad.)
• Double–click any Keynote document.
Every time you launch Keynote or try to create a new document, Keynote’s Template Chooser appears. The Template
Chooser contains Apple designed templates and any Templates created by you. Apple’s Templates can be customized to
suit your tastes or to comply with a business’s graphic identity. There will be more on Themes later. The White and Black
Themes are good options to experiment with.
Keynote has features that are shared with, or are similar to, features found in other Apple applications such as Numbers and
Pages. This section lists these features. Understanding features including Inspectors and the Media Browser are essential
when learning about any Apple software.
To explore the features described in Section 1. launch Keynote and open any Template. When launching Keynote the
following message may appear.
By default Keynote’s window contains a customizable Tool Bar, a Format Bar, a Slides Pane, and the Slide Canvas. Other
panes may be opened, including Master Slides Pane, and Presenter Notes Pane.
The Tool Bar contains several icons. These control common functions and will be described later. Note that some Tool
Bar Icons are greyed-out meaning they cannot be used. They become active once an Object is selected. Also note that the
Tool Bar can be customized to display buttons for commands based on user preference. From left to right:
• New – This adds a new slide. The keyboard shortcut is Command – Shift – N.
• Play – This starts the presentation in Slideshow, at the selected slide, the keyboard shortcut is Command–Alt–P.
To start a Slideshow from the first slide hold down the Alt key and click the Play button in the Tool Bar.
• View – changes the View Mode. Options include Navigator, Outline, Slide Only and Light Table. Of these
Navigator and Light Table are the most useful when constructing documents. Outline Mode will be discussed
further in Section 5.4. View also controls the display of Rulers, Format Bat, Presenter Notes and Master Slides.
When developing a presentation to support a speech or lecture using Presenter Notes can prove a great aid to memory.
Keynote can be configured to display on two displays simultaneously, one showing slides to an audience and a comprehensive
display of Presenter Notes, Next Slide and Time Elapsed or Remaining on the other.
Comments can be temporarily hidden from the View Menu. Comments are like virtual sticky notes and can be found in
all the iWork applications.
• Guides – By default Keynote displays alignment guides to help layout. These appear as yellow lines that indicate
whether an object is aligned to the top, bottom, centre or side of another object, or where it is in relation to
the canvas. Choosing all four options from Show Guides at Object Center to Show Relative Sizes will give
maximum layout feedback help.
• Themes – On launching Keynote a Theme Chooser appears. Users can create their own Themes. Having a
Theme button in the Tool Bar allows Themes to be swapped in an open document. This function is useful for
companies wishing to update presentations to meet their latest visual identity guidelines. A presentation using
their properly applied 2008 theme can be updated to their 2012 theme in a single click.
• Masters – Themes contain several Master Slides; Title & Subtitle, Title & Bullets, Title & Bullets – 2 Column…
et cetera. Use this menu to change slides to different Masters.
• Text Box – This adds a simple text box to the slide canvas. It is better to use a slide Master with a Text Box and
modify it. This makes the Theme change function work speedily. It isn’t wrong, nor does it expose weaknesses
in the Keynote software, to add Text Boxes. Additional Text Boxes cannot be automatically changed when
changing Themes.