There are six table presets; each providing an insight into the variety of Cell Formats. Controls for Cells can be explored
by right–clicking or Control–Clicking a Cell or Cells.
The six table types are:
• Headers – This includes one header column and one header row. Headers are used to label columns and rows.
Headers are automatically formatted so that they stand out from other cells in a Table. They are always the
topmost row or the first column on the left of a Table. Numbers supports up to five header rows and columns.
Multiple headers are useful when assigning names to two or more header columns or rows.
• Basic – is similar to the Headers preset except that it does not contain a row header.
• Sums – like Basic, this has columns headers, no row headers, but includes a Footer Row. The Footer Row cells
contain a SUM formula which totals any number values entered into the columns.
• Plain – is a simple grid of Cells with no headers or formula added.
• Checklist – is a useful example of Cell Formatting. Column A contains Checkboxes. So if making, for instance,
a Do List once a task has been completed it can be simply ticked to indicate its completion. Other types of Cell
Format are Stepper, Slider and Pop-up Menu. Cells can be formatted for Numbers, Currency, Percentage, Date
& Time, Duration, Fraction, Numeral System, Scientific and Text.
• Sums Checklist – is identical to Checklist save that the first column contains checkboxes.
Cells are formatted as Automatic when they are created. This means that data can be entered without the user having to
consider which format to use. Numbers allows users to change cell formatting depending on their project requirements.
The types of Cell Format are Numbers, Currency, Percentage, Date & Time, Duration, Fraction, Numeral System, Scientific,
and Text. There are also, Stepper, Slider and Pop-up Menu formats.
To manually format a cell, column or row, select it, then in the Cells Inspector click on the drop down menu and change
the formatting accordingly. In addition users can make custom formats. This option is also found in the drop down menu
of the Cells Inspector.
If a date is entered into a Cell, for example 04/04/2012, Numbers will automatically read this as a date and will display
it as such; 4th April 2012.
If this is not the desired date format, select that cell, column or row and in the Cells Inspector use the Date menu to
change the formatting. The options found in the Cells Inspector can also be found on the Format Bar.
When entering data into Cells, to move the insertion point to the next Cell in the row press TAB. To move the insertion
point to the cell below press Return. Use the Arrow keys to move the insertion point freely.
A series is a range of linked values. For example, months or weekdays where February follows January, Tuesday follows
Monday. Numbers understands such series. To prove this point try typing January into a column. Select that cell and
click-drag on the bottom right hand corner of the cell and, moving the cursor down the column, the column automatically
sequences the rows with all the months of the year. The same process can be applied to weekdays.
If a date is entered into the top body cell of a Column, for example 01/01/12, a date sequence can be created. By clickdragging
on the bottom right hand corner of the cell and moving the cursor down the column, the column automatically
sequences the rows as following days; 2nd, 3rd, 4th January and so on. Brilliant, but this can be frustrating if, for instance, a
series based on weeks is required. The way to achieve this is to manually enter the date information for the first two months
of your series, say 04/04/2012 and 04/05/12. Then select the row for April, hold down the Shift key and select May, both
rows are now selected. Click–drag the bottom right hand corner of the May cell and the date series now runs in months.
In the illustration Column A was created using consecutive days, 04/04/12 was typed into Cell A1 then dragged to fill
Column A. In Column B 04/04/12 was typed into Cell B1, then 11/04/12 into Cell B2 before both these Cells were selected
and dragged to fill Column B. Column C is a series based on the first day of the month. Column D illustrates the drag
operation, and is a series based on years.
Use the Cell Inspector to change how the dates are displayed.
Other series might include a dinner menu. Typing Aperitif, Starters, Main, Deserts, Coffee into a successive Rows of a
Column then performing the Shift–Clicking and Dragging operation described above will repeat those five elements
down the column ad nauseam.
And there’s more. Hovering the cursor over the reference tab for the date column reveals a triangle, clicking on this
invokes a menu. That menu has an option ‘Categorize by This Column’. If this is selected the months are automatically
divided into years. If the sequence was stepping-up in days then ‘Categorize by This Column’ would divide the column
into months.
Numbers is full of features like this. There is not space to explore all the permutations here. The key to understanding lies
in understanding how Cells are automatically formatted and how this formatting can be ‘trained’ to behave in new ways.
Using the menus that appear on the reference tabs, users can sort columns and rows. Typically data is sorted by Column,
for example by date ascending. Sometimes more sophisticated sort options are required, these can be accessed via the
reference tab menus and are labelled, ‘Show More Options’. In the example Column B, Fruit Type is being sorted to display
in alphabetical order.
The following example shows a fictitious Table for a green-grocer’s fruit order. This and the previous illustration contain
the same data, but the second Table has been categorized by Column.