While we focus on white-collar financial crime in this book on computer crime, we must not forget that there are a number of other types of crime that are typical for cyber crime and Internet crime as well. Typical examples are hacking, child pornography and online child grooming. In this chapter, we present the case of child grooming as computer crime. Internet use has grown considerably in the last decade. Information technology now forms a core part of the formal education system in many countries, ensuring that each new generation of Internet users is more adept than the last. Research studies in the UK suggest that the majority of young people aged 9-19 accessed the Internet at least once a day. The Internet provides the opportunity to interact with friends on social networking sites such as Myspace and Bebo and enables young people to access information in a way that previous generations would not have thought possible. The medium also allows users to post detailed personal information, which may be accessed by any site visitor and provides a platform for peer communication hitherto unknown (Davidson and Martellozzo, 2008). There is, however, increasing evidence that the Internet is used by some adults to access children and young people in order to groom them for the purposes of sexual abuse. Myspace have recently expelled 29,000 suspected sex offenders and is being sued in the United States by parents who claim that their children were contacted by sex offenders on the site and consequently abused (BBC, 2007). The Internet also plays a role in facilitating the production and distribution of indecent illegal images of children, which may encourage and complement online grooming. 

Recent advances in computer technology have been aiding sexual sex offenders, stalkers, child pornographers, child traffickers, and others with the intent of exploiting children (Kierkegaard, 2008: 41): Internet bulletin boards, chat rooms, private websites, and peer-to-peer networks are being used daily by pedophiles to meet unsuspecting children. Compounding the problem is the lack of direct governance by an international body, which will curb the illegal content and activity. Most countries already have laws protecting children, but what is needed is a concerted law enforcement and international legislation to combat child sex abuse. Men who target young people online for sex are pedophiles (Kierkegaard, 2008; Wolak et al., 2008). According to Dunaigre (2001), the pedophile is an emblematic figure, made into a caricature and imbued with all the fears, anxieties and apprehensions rocking our society today. Pedophile acts are - according to the World Health Organization (WHO) - sexual behavior that an adult major (16 years or over), overwhelmingly of the male sex, acts out towards prepubescent children (13 years or under). According to the WHO, there must normally be a five-year age difference between the two, except in the case of pedophilic practices at the end of adolescence where what counts is more the difference in sexual maturity. However, the definition of criminal behavior varies among countries. As will become evident from reading this article, pedophile acts in Norway are sexual behavior that a person acts out towards children of 16 years or under. There is no minimum age definition for the grooming person in Norwegian criminal law, but age difference and difference in sexual maturity is included as criteria for criminal liability. 

Wolak et al. (2009: 4) present two case examples of crimes by online sex offenders in the United States: • Police in West Coast state found child pornography in the possession of the 22-year-old offender. The offender, who was from a North-eastern state, confessed to befriending a 13-year-old local boy online, traveling to the West Coast, and meeting him for sex. Prior to the meeting, the offender and victim had corresponded online for about six months. The offender had sent the victim nude images via web cam and e-mail and they had called and texted each other hundreds of times. When they met for sex, the offender took graphic pictures of the encounter. The victim believed he was in love with the offender. He lived alone with his father and was struggling to fit in and come to terms with being gay. The offender possessed large quantities of child pornography that he had downloaded from the Internet. He was sentenced to 10 years in prison. • A 24-year-old man met a 14-year-old girl at a social networking site. He claimed to be 19. Their online conversation became romantic and sexual and the victim believed she was in love. They met several times for sex over a period of weeks. The offender took nude pictures of the victim and gave her alcohol and drugs. Her mother and stepfather found out and reported the crime to the police. The victim was lonely, had issues with drugs and alcohol, and problems at school and with her parents. She had posted provocative pictures of herself on her social networking site. She had met other men online and had sex with them. The offender was a suspect in another online enticement case. He was found guilty but had not been sentenced at time of the interview. 

According to Davidson and Martellozzo (2008: 277), Internet sex offender behavior can include: "the construction of sites to be used for the exchange of information, experiences, and indecent images of children; the organization of criminal activities that seek to use children for prostitution purposes and that produce indecent images of children at a professional level; the organization of criminal activities that promote sexual tourism". Child grooming is a process that commences with sexual sex offenders choosing a target area that is likely to attract children. In the physical world, this could be venues visited by children such as schools, shopping malls or playgrounds. A process of grooming then commences when offenders take a particular interest in the child and make them feel special with the intention of forming a bond. The Internet has greatly facilitated this process in the virtual world. Offenders now seek out their victims by visiting Internet relay chat (IRC) rooms from their home or Internet cafés at any time. Once a child victim is identified, the offender can invite it into a private area of the IRC to engage in private conversations on intimate personal details including the predator's sex life (Australian, 2008).