The risk of computer crime has become a global issue affecting almost all countries. Salifu (2008) argues that the Internet is a "double-edged sword" providing many opportunities for individuals and organizations to develop and prosper, but at the same time has brought with it new opportunities to commit crime. For example, Nigeria-related financial crime is extensive and 122 out of 138 countries at an Interpol meeting complained about Nigerian involvement in financial fraud in their countries. The most notorious type attempted daily on office workers all over the world, is the so-called advance fee fraud. The sender will seek to involve the recipient in a scheme to earn millions of dollars if the recipient pays an advance fee (Ampratwum, 2009). Computer crime is an overwhelming problem worldwide. It has brought an array of new crime activities and actors and, consequently, a series of new challenges in the fight against this new threat (Picard, 2009). Policing computer crime is a knowledge-intensive challenge indeed because of the innovative aspect of many kinds of computer crime. Cyberspace presents a challenging new frontier for criminology, police science, law enforcement and policing. Virtual reality and computer-mediated communications challenge the traditional discourse of criminology and police work, introducing new forms of deviance, crime, and social control. Since the 1990s, academics and practitioners have observed how cyberspace has emerged as a new field of criminal activity. Cyberspace is changing the nature and scope of offending and victimization. A new discipline named cyber criminology is emerging. Jaishankar (2007) defines cyber criminology as the study of causation of crimes that occur in the cyberspace and its impact in the physical space. 

Employees of the organization commit most computer crime, and the crime occurs inside company walls (Hagen et al., 2008: Nykodym et al, 2005). However, in our perspective of financial crime introduced in this chapter, we will define computer crime as a profit-oriented crime rather than a damage-oriented crime, thereby excluding the traditional focus of dissatisfied and frustrated employees wanting to harm their own employers. 

Computer crime is defined as any violations of criminal law that involve knowledge of computer technology for their perpetration, investigation, or prosecution (Laudon and Laudon, 2010). The initial role of information and communication technology was to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of organizations. However, the quest of efficiency and effectiveness serves more obscure goals as fraudsters exploit the electronic dimension for personal profits. Computer crime is an overwhelming problem that has brought an array of new crime types (Picard, 2009). Examples of computer-related crimes include sabotage, software piracy, and stealing personal data (Pickett and Pickett, 2002). In computer crime terminology, the term cracker is typically used to denote a hacker with a criminal intent. No one knows the magnitude of the computer crime problem – how many systems are invaded, how many people engage in the practice, or the total economic damage. According to Laudon and Laudon (2010), the most economically damaging kinds of computer crime are denial-of-service attacks, where customer orders might be rerouted to another supplier. Eleven men in five countries carried out one of the worst data thefts for credit card fraud ever (Laudon and Laudon, 2010: 326): In early August 2008, U.S. federal prosecutors charged 11 men in five countries, including the United States, Ukraine, and China, with stealing more than 41 million credit and debit card numbers. This is now the biggest known theft of credit card numbers in history. The thieves focused on major retail chains such as OfficeMax, Barnes & Noble, BJ’s Wholesale Club, the Sports Authority, and T.J. Marxx. The thieves drove around and scanned the wireless networks of these retailers to identify network vulnerabilities and then installed sniffer programs obtained from overseas collaborators. The sniffer programs tapped into the retailers’ networks for processing credit cards, intercepting customers’ debit and credit card numbers and PINs (personal identification numbers). The thieves then sent that information to computers in the Ukraine, Latvia, and the United States. They sold the credit card numbers online and imprinted other stolen numbers on the magnetic stripes of blank cards so they could withdraw thousands of dollars from ATM machines. Albert Gonzales of Miami was identified as a principal organizer of the ring. 

The conspirators began their largest theft in July 2005, when they identified a vulnerable network at a Marshall’s department store in Miami and used it to install a sniffer program on the computers of the chain’s parent company, TJX. They were able to access the central TJX database, which stored customer transactions for T.J. Marxx, Marshalls, HomeGoods, and A.J. Wright stores in the United States and Puerto Rico, and for Winners and HomeSense stores in Canada. Fifteen months later, TJX reported that the intruders had stolen records with up to 45 million credit and debit card numbers. TJX was still using the old Wired Equivalent Privacy (WEP) encryption system, which is relatively easy for hackers to crack. Other companies had switched to the more secure Wi-Fi Protected Access (WPA) standard with more complex encryption, but TJX did not make the change. An auditor later found that TJX had also neglected to install firewalls and data encryption on many of the computers using the wireless network, and did not properly install another layer of security software it had purchased. TJX acknowledged in a Securities and Exchange Commission filing that it transmitted credit card data to banks without encryption, violating credit card company guidelines. Computer crime, often used synonymous with cyber crime, refers to any crime that involves a computer and a network, where the computer has played a part in the commission of a crime. Internet crime, as the third crime label, refers to criminal exploitation of the Internet. In our perspective of profit-oriented crime, crime is facilitated by computer networks or devices, where the primary target is not computer networks and devices, but rather independent of the computer network or device. 

Cyber crime is a term used for attacks on the cyber security infrastructure of business organizations that can have several goals. One goal pursued by criminals is to gain unauthorized access to the target’s sensitive information. Most businesses are vitally dependent on their proprietary information, including new product information, employment records, price lists and sales figures. According to Gallaher et al. (2008), an attacker may derive direct economic benefits from gaining access to and/or selling such information, or may inflict damage on an organization by impacting upon it.