Cyber crime investigations have both similarities and differences when compared to traditional crime such as burglary and robbery. Traditional crime generally concern personal or property offences that law enforcement has continued to combat for centuries. Cyber crime is characterized by being technologically advanced, it can occur almost instantaneously, and it is extremely difficult to observe, detect, or track. These problems are compounded by the relative anonymity afforded by the Internet as well as the transcendence of geographical and physical limitations in cyberspace. Criminals are able to take advantage of a virtually limitless pool of potential victims (Hinduja, 2007). Policing financial crime generally – according to Pickett and Pickett (2002) – is concerned with whistle blowing and detection, roles of shareholders and main board and chief executive officer and senior executives, investigations, forensics. Policing financial crime – according to Levi (2007) – is concerned with the organization of policing deception, the contexts of police undercover work, covert investigations of white-collar crime, prosecution and relationship to policing fraud. Covert activity is restricted mainly to the informal obtaining of financial information or the official obtaining of information about suspected bank accounts without the knowledge of the account-holder. Policing cyber crime is concerned with all these issues as well as a tight surveillance of relevant activities on the Internet. Within crime investigations, IT forensics and cyber crime investigations are an extremely complicated field (Callanan and Jones, 2009). Kao and Wang (2009) suggest an approach to improving cyber crime investigation consisting of three stages: independent verification of digital clues, corresponding information from different sources, and preparation of a valid argument. Furthermore, covert investigations in the workplace represent a debated practice when investigating financial crime (Tackett, 2008). 

Investigation and prevention of cyber crime and building corporate reputation have the value configuration of a value shop. As can be seen in Figure 1, the five activities of a value shop are interlocking and while they follow a logical sequence, much like the management of any project, the difference from a knowledge management perspective is the way in which knowledge is used as a resource to create value in terms of results for the organization. Hence, the logic of the five interlocking value shop activities in this example is of a policing unit and how it engages in its core business of conducting reactive and proactive investigations. 

The sequence of activities starts with problem understanding, moves into alternative investigation approaches, investigation decision, and investigation implementation, and ends up with criminal investigation evaluation (Sheehan and Stabell, 2007). However, these five sequential activities tend to overlap and link back to earlier activities, especially in relation to activity 5 (control and evaluation) in policing units when the need for control and command structures are a daily necessity because of the legal obligations that policing unit authority entails. Hence, the diagram is meant to illustrate the reiterative and cyclical nature of these five primary activities for managing the knowledge collected during and applied to a specific investigation in a value shop manner. Furthermore, Figure 1 illustrates the expanding domain of the knowledge work performed in financial crime investigations, starting in the centre with problem understanding and ending at the edge with evaluation of all parts of the investigation process. These five primary activities of the value shop in relation to a financial crime investigation and prevention unit can be outlined as (Sheehan and Stabell, 2007): 1. Problem Definition. This involves working with parties to determine the exact nature of the crime and hence how it will be defined. For example, a physical assault in a domestic violence situation depending on how the responding officers choose and/or perceive to define it can be either upgraded to the status of grievous bodily harm to the female spouse victim or it may be downgraded to a less serious common, garden variety assault where a bit of rough handing took place towards the spouse. This concept of making crime, a term used on how detectives choose to make incidents into a crime or not, is highly relevant here and is why this first activity has been changed from the original problem finding term used in the business management realm to a problem definition process here in relation to policing work. Moreover, this first investigative activity involves deciding on the overall investigative approach for the case not only in terms of information acquisition but also as indicated on Figure 1 in undertaking the key task, usually by a senior investigative officer in a serious or major incident, of forming an appropriate investigative team to handle the case. 2. Investigation Approaches. This second activity of identifying problem solving approaches involves the actual generation of ideas and action plans for the investigation. As such it is a key process for it sets the direction and tone of the investigation and is very much influenced by the composition of the members of the investigative team. For example, the experience level of investigators and their preferred investigative thinking style might be a critical success factor in this second primary activity of the value shop. 

3. Approach Decision. This solution choice activity represents the decision of choosing between alternatives generated in the second activity. While the least important primary activity of the value shop in terms of time and effort, it might be the most important in terms of value. In this case, trying to ensure as far as is possible that what is decided on to do is the best option to follow to get an effective investigative result. A successful solution choice is dependent on two requirements. First, alternative investigation steps were identified in the problem solving approaches activity. It is important to think in terms of alternatives. Otherwise, no choices can be made. Next, criteria for decision-making have to be known and applied to the specific investigation. 4. Investigation Implementation. As the name implies, solution execution represents communicating, organizing, investigating, and implementing decisions. This is an equally important process or phase in an investigation as it involves sorting out from the mass of information coming into the incident room about a case and directing the lines of enquiry as well as establishing the criteria used to eliminate a possible suspect from further scrutiny in the investigation. A miscalculation here can stall or even ruin the whole investigation. Most of the resources spent on an investigation are used here in this fourth activity of the value shop.