English law distinguishes two kinds of defamation: slander (in speech) and libel (in writing);
because writing is permanent, libel is treated as being more seriously damaging than slander. Emails
and the like are often composed as casually and carelessly as spoken remarks, but they can
be preserved indefinitely and so the applicable law is libel law.
English libel law is strict: compared to other countries, it is easy for someone who feels damaged
by the written word to win a case against whoever is responsible, and awards for loss of reputation
have traditionally been large (though recent changes have moderated that to some extent).
As business first used the Web, libel law was scarcely relevant. Commercial websites were
concerned with promoting their own businesses, not normally with knocking their competitors.
But the Web is coming to be used in new ways. We have heard a great deal recently about “Web
2.0”. This is a vague, hype-laden piece of terminology, but one thing it commonly refers to is the
idea that websites – including commercial websites – are ceasing to be outlets for one-way
communication exclusively, and turning into two-way, conversational affairs, where for instance
a company will draw its customers and other interested parties into participation via blogs,
chatrooms, and similar mechanisms.
There are several business reasons why the “virtual communities” fostered by interactive
websites are potentially beneficial for a company. However, if members of the public are
encouraged to post material on a company website, the legal danger is that some individuals’
postings might include defamatory remarks about third parties. We know that electronic
communication tends to encourage a kind of “flaming” that is rare in other media. For the firm
owning the website, it would be regrettable enough to find one of its customers having to defend
a lawsuit as a consequence of contributing to a blog which that firm had set up. Even worse
would be the possibility of itself defending a defamation suit, if it is held responsible for others’
contributions to its site. A plaintiff who hopes for a large damages award will be more interested
in going after the firm than the individual; the firm is more likely to be able to pay.
So the question arises what legal responsibility a website owner has for material posted by others.
Questions like this arose before Web 2.0 days, in connexion with ISPs and operators of bulletin
boards. One way that lawyers think about the issue is to compare that kind of electronic
communication infrastructure with the world of newspapers and magazines, and to ask whether
the organizations are more like distributors (such as newsagents) or publishers. If a newspaper
contains a libellous article, the newsagents who sell the paper to readers would not normally be
held liable – they have no control over what appears in the paper and may not even be aware of it;
but the newspaper publisher has editorial control over what its journalists write, so will routinely
be treated as equally responsible with them for any libel.
In the case of electronic bulletin boards, some are moderated and others not. Ironically, although
providing moderation would normally be seen as the responsible thing for a bulletin board
operator to do, legally it might be a rather dangerous thing to do: it implies taking on a role more
like publisher than distributor.
In the USA (although libel law is far milder there) this situation was seen as creating such risks
for organizations which undertake the socially-valuable task of promoting electronic
communication that the risks were eliminated by statute (section 230 of the Telecommunications
Act 1996). This broadly says that service providers are not to be held responsible for content
posted by others, and that no liability arises from the moderating role.
Without a blanket exemption such as American law provides, a website run by a commercial firm
would be more likely to be held responsible for its contents than some bulletin board run by
amateur enthusiasts – the site contributes to business profits, so there would be little excuse for
not taking the trouble to moderate it. English law contains nothing parallel to §230 of the US
Telecommunications Act. Our Defamation Act 1996 provides that no-one is liable for the
contents of electronic communications if they act purely as unwitting distributors, but if they act
as “publishers” they are liable; a commercial website owner, like a newspaper publisher, would
have a duty to take reasonable care about what it publishes.
Even an ISP, with no commercial interest of its own in the contents of material it hosts, will
probably not escape liability under the 1996 Act if it has been told about defamatory material on
its servers (so that it can no longer claim to be an unwitting distributor). Consider Godfrey v.
Demon Internet Ltd (1999).
Dr Godfrey was a British computer science lecturer who allegedly made a hobby of starting
online flame wars and then bringing libel actions when people responded to his flames by being
nasty about him. In 1997 he faxed the MD of the leading British ISP Demon demanding the
removal of a scurrilous newsgroup posting which had come in from the USA. Demon routinely
deleted newsgroup postings after a fortnight, so the issue concerned only the ten days between
Godfrey’s fax and the normal deletion date; during that period, Demon failed to act (apparently
the fax never reached the MD’s desk). In view of this delay, the court found in preliminary
hearings in 1999 that Demon could not satisfy the requirement about taking reasonable care – at
which point Demon threw in the towel and settled out of court, paying Godfrey about a quarter of
a million pounds.
Although Godfrey v. Demon set no formal legal precedent (because it was settled rather than
fought out to a conclusion), the terms on which it was settled sent a thrill of fear through the
industry. It seems that (unless an ISP is prepared to investigate and satisfy itself that a complaint
is legally unfounded, which would often be difficult or impossible for it to achieve), its only safe
response to any complaint will be automatically to take down the material complained about.
This is what British ISPs have been tending to do.