When the View is set to Navigator, the pane to the left of the Slide Canvas is labelled Slides. Change the View to Outline
and the pane is labelled Outline. The other view modes include Slide Only and Light Table. The Navigator View is probably
the best option for creating and editing presentations, as thumbnails of the slide appear in the Slides Pane. This allows
thumbnails to be click–dragged into new positions and slides to be duplicated and deleted with ease.
Click-dragging a slide in Navigator View will reposition it in the running order. Holding down the Alt key whilst doing
this will copy the slide to a new location. As with nearly all keyboard short–cuts the modifier key, in this case the Alt
Key, should only be released after the mouse button is released. Other operations can be accessed using right–click on
the Slides Pane.
Other operations include the ability to skip slides. This is useful when shorter versions of a presentation are required;
perhaps a thirty minute slot has been cut to twenty. The Skip function is a safe way to trim a presentation without deleting
any data. Skipped slides won’t display as part of a Slide Show, but can be easily un–skipped too; the context menu command
for this is Don’t Skip Slide.
In teaching scenarios a Keynote can be prepared with extra sections that might be useful in class, but can be set to Skip
by default, and only revealed if the teacher thinks it prudent to explore such areas. Skipping slides avoids the need to have
several similar Keynote documents on the same subject. So rather than having to update several Keynotes as data changes,
just the one document needs updating and the Skip function helps tailor the presentation for a variety of audiences and
durations.
Only revealed when the View is set to Show Master Slides, the Master Slide Pane appears above the Slides or Outline
Pane to the left of the Slide Canvas. From here the current slide’s format can be changed from one Master to another.
Simply click the slide or slides to be changed and click on the desired Master. This operation can also be achieved using
the Master button in the Tool Bar.
The Presenter Notes Pane appears under the Slide Canvas when set from the View menu in the Tool Bar.
Presenter notes can be copied and pasted from other applications such as Pages or typed directly into the Presenter Notes
Pane. They can be a great aid to memory when making presentations. Presenter Notes can also be included in handouts
printed from Keynote.
The Inspector is a key feature in Apple’s iLife and iWork software. Users new to Apple Mac software need to embrace the
use of the Inspector. Inspectors control nearly all the parameters in iWork software. Numbers, Pages and Keynote have
some unique Inspectors and some in common. For instance all the applications have a Document Inspector containing
slightly different parameters in each.
The Inspector is launched by either clicking the Inspector icon in the Toolbar or View > Show Inspector.
Keynote has ten inspector tabs. They are:
• Document Inspector –
The Document Inspector should be used when first setting up a document. Divided into three tabs. The first tab contains
slideshow preferences with options for Looping the slideshow. From here the Presentation mode can be changed, along
with the Slide Size.
The bottom section is Require Password To Open. For additional security a password can be entered to lock a Keynote
document. The password would then be required every-time the document is opened.
The next tab is Audio. There are several ways to add audio to a presentation, and using this tab this may not be the most
flexible option.
The last tab is Spotlight. Completing the fields for Author, Title, Keywords, and Comments is recommended practice. It
makes documents easier to search for, especially when using the Mac Spotlight search engine. All of these fields are for
metadata. Author and Title are self-explanatory. Adding Keywords helps classify a document. For example a Keynote
document designed for a seminar on Apple’s Aperture could have the keywords, ‘Apple’, ‘Aperture’, ‘photography’, ‘digital
imaging’ and ’45 minutes’. The list could go on. There are five keywords here. Keywords are denoted by commas, ‘Apple,
Aperture, photography’ ‘digital imaging’ and ‘45 minutes’ are all single keywords.
Searches can be case-sensitive, but using ‘apple’ and ‘Apple’ as keywords is not strictly necessary. When choosing keywords
it is helpful to invoke the spirit of the librarian. A less rigorous form of applying metadata is using the Comments field. Here
paragraphs of descriptive text can add be added. In the example of the Apple Aperture Keynote document, the comments
field could read, ‘Seminar Presentation for Apple’s Aperture, aimed at the serious amateur and professional audience…’
• Slide Inspector –
The Slide Inspector has two tabs, Transition and Appearance. Transitions can be applied to one or more slides at a time.
There are currently forty-eight transition effects and something known as Magic Move, located in the Effect menu of the
Transition tab. Experiment with the transitions to learn more, try changing the transition duration as this may enhance the
effect. Some transitions have a direction, moving from left to right, or top to bottom. When this is the case the Direction
menu becomes active. The Start Transition menu is set to On Click by default, meaning that to move the the next slide a
mouse click or an alternative to click has to be made†. Transitions can be triggered in other ways, as listed in the Start
Transition menu.
† Alternatives to a mouse click, include clicking a trackpad, tapping the Spacebar, using a keyboard’s forward arrow key,
using a remote control device