The Media Browser appears in many of Apple’s application software. It is a system wide utility that is accessed from within
programs such as Keynote. It has a distinct icon displaying a frame of film, a picture frame and two musical notes. This
icon appears in different places in different applications.
The Media Browser can be launched from the Toolbar or View > Media Browser. It contains three tabs, Audio, Photos
and Movies.
Audio – This contains tracks from the current user’s iTune account. Garage band projects, these might include voice–overs
or podcasts and audio from other applications such as Aperture or Final Cut.
Photos – This contains images stored in iPhoto or Aperture is it is installed
Movies – This contains video files stored in iMovie, the current user’s Movies Folder, or in iTunes. If Final Cut or Aperture
are installed video files from those applications will also appear here.
The bottom pane of the Media Browser contains thumbnails of the respective media files. Double–clicking the thumbnail
previews the file. In the case of Photos it enlarges the thumbnail to fill the Media Browser pane.
As with all iWork applications, Keynote stores graphics and other media within the file itself, with the exception of Fonts.
This makes for easy transfer of files from workstation to laptop et cetera. A consequence of this is that iWork documents
may have large files sizes though there is an easy remedy in the Reduce File Size command. This will be illustrated in
Section 16 — Sharing Your Work.
To insert a media file or files select them in the Media Browser and drag them onto the Keynote Slide Canvas.
When images are placed into Keynote they may look too dark or lack contrast. Like all iWork applications there is an
Adjust Image window that can be used to adjust the brightness, contrast, saturation and other image parameters directly
within Keynote. There are several image parameters that can be used to finesse imported photographs though often just
clicking the Enhance button will improve a picture.
Image Adjust is an icon in the Toolbar, or can be launched from View > Adjust.
When you have taken the time to format a picture frame or text box there is no need to repeat all the steps taken when
you wish to apply that style to subsequent objects. Styles can be copied and pasted. Start this process by creating two text
boxes. Use the Graphics Inspector to stylize one box. Ensure that Text Box is selected then go to Format > Copy Style.
Select the second text box and go to Format > Paste Style. The second Text Box will take on the general appearance of
the stylized one.
There are several methods for preparing presentations. With presentations planning and rehearsal are essential. As
previously stated this guide does not aim to explain the art of presentation. Information on presentation creation and
delivery can be found on the web with several sites offering Keynote tips and techniques. Suffice to say planning is required
before opening Keynote.
Keynote can help structure planning processes, once you have a concept in mind. Outline mode is a particularly useful
way to list bullet points as hierarchies and sequences when creating a presentation from scratch.
There are five stages in the life of a presentation:
1. Planning – What you need to do before opening Keynote and using Keynote in Outline mode.
2. Construction – Using Outline, Navigator and Light Table modes to build and sequence the presentation.
3. Rehearsal — For presentations that are to be delivered to an audience rehearsal is very important. Keynote has
a rehearsal mode that can be used to check timings.
4. Delivery — After rehearsals comes the main event often in front of an audience. Being able to stop and jump to
different slides is a useful skill. Keynote presentations don’t have to be delivered in person. Using Kiosk mode
allows users to navigate through presentation material on their own.
5. Legacy – Making a presentation may be sufficient, though legacy items can be created, such as handouts or
narrated versions of the presentation in video form that can be accessed on-demand, by whoever.
Keynote ships with forty-four Apple designed themes. Themes are collections of Master Slides, for example, titles slides,
bullets, bullets with photos, and so on. Themes have a coordinated design for fonts, colours and style across their respective
Master Slides.
An Apple Designed Theme may be a perfect starting point for a presentation, though users can generate and save their
own themes, or purchase extra themes online. Defining Master Slides and creating custom themes will be explored later.
Some Keynote Themes only have two resolutions, 800 x 600 pixels and 1024 x 768 pixels. Newer Themes come in three
additional sizes; 1280 x 720, 1920 x 1080†, and 1680 x 1050. Although presentations can be set to playback so that they
fill the screen, choosing an option with sufficient resolution at an appropriate aspect ratio is very important.
The Theme Chooser contains all the themes currently available including any custom ones you might make. To see
previews of all the Master Slides in a Theme, skim the cursor over the Theme’s thumbnail. Before selecting a slide select
the correct slide resolution from the Slide SIze Pop–up menu.
Master Slides are preset layouts for title slides, bullet point slides, bullets with a picture and so on. Themes are a collection
of Master Slides. The Master icon in the toolbar can be used to change one or more slides to a different master layout.
The View icon in the toolbar can be used to Show Master Slides. Click dragging Master Slide thumbnails onto existing
slides thumbnails changes their master layout.
Although many users begin making their Keynote, or Powerpoint, presentations in slide view, Outline view is a great way
to structure ideas. iWork’s Pages has several Outline templates to help with this task.
Outline view is one of several options that can be found under the View menu. If the default Outline view is not suitable it
can be adjusted. To make the Slide pane areas bigger move the cursor over the resize handle and click drag to adjust its size.