As mentioned previously a major reason for wishing to obtain a mathematical model of a device
is to be able to evaluate the output in response to a given input. Using the transfer function and
Laplace transforms provides a particularly elegant way of doing this. This is because for a block
with input U(s) and transfer function G(s) the output Y(s) = G(s)U(s). When the input, u(t), is a
unit impulse which is conventionally denoted by  (t), U(s) = 1 so that the output Y(s) = G(s).
Thus in the time domain, y(t) = g(t), the inverse Laplace transform of G(s), which is called the
impulse response or weighting function of the block. The evaluation of y(t) for any input u(t) can
be done in the time domain using the convolution integral (see Appendix A, theorem (ix))
but it is normally much easier to use the transform relationship Y(s) = G(s)U(s). To do this one
needs to find the Laplace transform of the input u(t), form the product G(s)U(s) and then find its
inverse Laplace transform. G(s)U(s) will be a ratio of polynomials in s and to find the inverse
Laplace transform, the roots of the denominator polynomial must be found to allow the
expression to be put into partial fractions with each term involving one denominator root (pole).
Assuming, for example, the input is a unit step so that U(s) = 1/s then putting G(s)U(s) into
partial fractions will result in an expression for Y(s) of the form
where in the transfer function G(s) = B(s)/A(s), the n poles of G(s) [zeros of A(s)] are  i, i = 1…n
and the coefficients C0 and Ci, i = 1…n, will depend on the numerator polynomial B(s), and are
known as the residues at the poles. Taking the inverse Laplace transform yields
The first term is a constant C0, sometimes written C0u0(t) because the Laplace transform is
defined for t   0, where u0(t) denotes the unit step at time zero. Each of the other terms is an
exponential, which provided the real part of  i is negative will decay to zero as t becomes large.
In this case the transfer function is said to be stable as a bounded input has produced a bounded
output. Thus a transfer function is stable if all its poles lie in the left hand side (lhs) of the s plane
zero-pole plot illustrated in Figure 2.1. The larger the negative value of  i the more rapidly the
contribution from the ith term decays to zero. Since any poles which are complex occur in
complex pairs, say of the form  1, 2 =   ± j , then the corresponding two residues C1 and C2 will
be complex pairs and the two terms will combine to give a term of the form Ce t sin( t  ) .
This is a damped oscillatory exponential term where  , which will be negative for a stable
transfer function, determines the damping and   the frequency [strictly angular frequency] of the
oscillation. For a specific calculation most engineers, as mentioned earlier, will leave a complex
pair of roots as a quadratic factor in the partial factorization process, as illustrated in the Laplace
transform inversion example given in Appendix A. For any other input to G(s), as with the step
input, the poles of the Laplace transform of the input will occur in a term of the partial fraction
expansion (3.2), [as for the C0/s term above], and will therefore produce a bounded output for a
bounded input.
In control engineering the major deterministic input signals that one may wish to obtain
responses to are a step, an impulse, a ramp and a constant frequency input. The purpose of this
section is to discuss step responses of specific transfer functions, hopefully imparting an
understanding of what can be expected from a knowledge of the zeros and poles of the transfer
function without going into detailed mathematics.
A transfer function with a single pole is
s a
G s K
 
( )  1 , which may also be written in the socalled
time constant form
sT
G s K
 
 
1
( ) , where K K / a 1  and T  1/ a The steady state
gainG(0)  K , that is the final value of the response, and T is called the time constant as it
determines the speed of the response. K will have units relating the input quantity to the output
quantity, for example °C/V, if the input is a voltage and the output temperature. T will have the
same units of time as s-1, normally seconds. The output, Y(s), for a unit step input is given by
Taking the inverse Laplace transform gives the result
The larger the value of T (i.e. the smaller the value of a), the slower the exponential response. It
can easily be shown that y(T)  0.632K , T
dt
dy(0)  
and y(5T)  0.993K or in words, the
output reaches 63.2% of the final value after a time T, the initial slope of the response is T and
the response has essentially reached the final value after a time 5T. The step response in
MATLAB can be obtained by the command step(num,den). The figure below shows the step
response for the transfer function with K = 1 on a normalised time scale.
Here the transfer function G(s) is often assumed to be of the form
It has a unit steady state gain, i.e G(0) = 1, and poles at       1  2 o o s j , which are
complex when   1. For a unit step input the output Y(s), can be shown after some algebra,
which has been done so that the inverse Laplace transforms of the second and third terms are
damped cosinusoidal and sinusoidal expressions, to be given by
Taking the inverse Laplace transform it yields, again after some algebra,
where   cos 1 .  is known as the damping ratio. It can also be seen that the angle to the
negative real axis from the origin to the pole with positive imaginary part is
tan 1 (1  2 )1/ 2 /  cos 1   .
