Fake websites have become increasingly pervasive and trustworthy in their appearance, generating billions of dollars in fraudulent revenue at the expense of unsuspecting Internet users. Abbasi et al. (2010) found that the growth in profitable fake websites is attributable to several factors, including their authentic appearance, a lack of user awareness regarding them, and the ability of fraudsters to undermine many existing mechanisms for protecting against them. The design and appearance of these websites makes it difficult for users to manually identify them as fake. Distinctions can be made between spoof sites and concocted sites. A spoof site is an imitation of an existing commercial website such as eBay or PayPal. A concocted site is a deceptive website attempting to create the impression of a legitimate, unique and trustworthy entity. Detecting fake websites is difficult. There is a need for both fraud cues as well as problem-specific knowledge. Fraud cues are important design elements of fake websites that may serve as indicators of their lack of authenticity. First, fake websites often use automatic content generation techniques to mass-produce fake web pages. Next, fraud cues include information, navigation, and visual design. Information in terms of web page text often contains fraud cues stemming from information design elements. Navigation in terms of linkage information and URL names for a website can provide relevant fraud cues relating to navigation design characteristics. For example, it is argued that 70 percent of ".biz" domain pages are fake sites. Fake websites frequently use images from existing legitimate or prior fake websites. For example spoof sites copy company logos from the websites they are mimicking. The fact that it is copied can be detected in the system (Abbasi et al., 2010). In addition to fraud cues, there is a need for problem-specific knowledge. Problem-specific knowledge regarding the unique properties of fake websites includes stylistic similarities and content duplication (Abbasi et al., 2010). Abbasi et al. (2010) developed a prototype system for fake website detection. The system is based on statistical learning theory. Statistical learning theory is a computational learning theory that attempts to explain the learning process from a statistical point of view. The researchers conducted a series of experiments, comparing the prototype system against several existing fake website detection systems on a test sample encompassing 900 websites. The results indicate that systems grounded in statistical learning theory can more accurately detect various categories of fake websites by utilizing richer sets of fraud cues in combination with problem-specific knowledge. A variation of fake websites is fraudulent email solicitation where the sender of an email claims an association with known and reputable corporations or organizational entities. For example, one email from the "Microsoft/AOL Award Team" notified its winners of a sweepstake by stating, "The prestigious Microsoft and AOL has set out and successfully organized a Sweepstakes marking the end of year anniversary we rolled out over 100,000.000.00 for our new year Anniversary Draw" (Nhan et al., 2009). The email proceeded to ask for the potential victim's personal information. 

Nhan et al. (2009) examined 476 fraudulent email solicitations, and found that the three most frequently alleged organizational associations were Microsoft, America Online, and PayPal. Fraudsters also attempt to establish trust through associating with credit-issuing financial corporations and authoritative organizations and groups. 

Money laundering is an important activity for most criminal activity (Abramova, 2007; Council of Europe, 2007; Elvins, 2003). Money laundering means the securing of the proceeds of a criminal act. The proceeds must be integrated into the legal economy before the perpetrators can use it. The purpose of laundering is to make it appear as if the proceeds were acquired legally, as well as disguises its illegal origins (Financial Intelligence Unit, 2008). Money laundering takes place within all types of profit-motivated crime, such as embezzlement, fraud, misappropriation, corruption, robbery, distribution of narcotic drugs and trafficking in human beings (Økokrim, 2008). Money laundering has often been characterized as a three-stage process that requires (1) moving the funds from direct association with the crime, (2) disguising the trail to foil pursuit, and (3) making them available to the criminal once again with their occupational and geographic origins hidden from view. The first stage is the most risky one for the criminals, since money from crime is introduced into the financial system. Stage 1 is often called the placement stage. Stage 2 is often called the layering stage, in which money is moved in order to disguise or remove direct links to the offence committed. The money may be channeled through several transactions, which could involve a number of accounts, financial institutions, companies and funs as well as the use of professionals such as lawyers, brokers and consultants as intermediaries. Stage 3 is often called the integration stage, where a legitimate basis for asset origin has been created. The money is made available to the criminal and can be used freely for private consumption, luxury purchases, real estate investment or investment in legal businesses. Money laundering has also been described as a five-stage process: placement, layering, integration, justification, and embedding (Stedje, 2004). It has also been suggested that money laundering falls outside of the category of financial crime. Since money-laundering activities may use the same financial system that is used for the perpetration of core financial crime, its overlap with the latter is apparent (Stedje, 2004). According to Joyce (2005), criminal money is frequently removed from the country in which the crime occurred to be cycled through the international payment system to obscure any audit trail. The third stage of money laundering is done in different ways. For example, a credit card might be issued by offshore banks, casino 'winning' can be cashed out, capital gains on option and stock trading might occur, and real estate sale might cause profit. 

The proceeds of criminal acts could be generated from organized crime such as drug trafficking, people smuggling, people trafficking, proceeds from robberies or money acquired by embezzlement, tax evasion, fraud, abuse of company structures, insider trading or corruption. The Financial Intelligence Unit (2008) in Norway argues that most criminal acts are motivated by profit. When crime generates significant proceeds, the perpetrators need to find a way to control the assets without attracting attention to them selves or the offence committed. Thus, the money laundering process is decisive in order to enjoy the proceeds without arousing suspicion.