When a business enterprise is the potential victim of computer crime, there are a number of measures that can be implemented to protect the business. In the survey by Hagen et al. (2008), they addressed both breath and depth in defense strategies. Depth is concerned with technological as well as organizational measures, while depth is concerned with dimensions of prevention, emergency preparedness and detection. The survey addressed the use of a broad range of technical security measures relating to access control and protection of data. Technical security measures include prevention (password, physical zones, biometric authentication, and software update), emergency (backup), and detection (intrusion detection and antivirus software). Organizational security measures include prevention (access rights and user guidelines), emergency (management plans), detection (log reviews), and incident response (management reports). The survey showed that the use of personal passwords is widespread among all enterprises, even the smallest ones (Hagen et al., 2008: 364): The trend is that the use of a variety of access control mechanisms increases with enterprise size. There is also a clear tendency that large enterprises implement more and a wider range of emergency preparedness and detection measures. The findings show that small enterprises should strengthen their access control and data protection measures, in addition to security routines. Hagen et al. (2008) found it surprising that large enterprises did not perform better than small enterprises when it comes to awareness raising and education of users as organizational security measures. 

Profiling of criminals is based on the idea that an individual committing crime in cyberspace using a computer can fit a certain outline or profile. A profile consists of offender characteristics that represent assumptions of the offender’s personality and behavioral appearance. Characteristics can include physical build, offender sex, work ethic, mode of transportation, criminal history, skill level, race, marital status, passiveness/aggressiveness, medical history, and offender residence in relation to the crime (Nykodym et al., 2005). Nykodym et al. (2005: 413) make distinctions between four main categories of cyber crime: espionage, theft, sabotage, and personal abuse of the organizational network: Unlike saboteurs and spies, the thief is guided only by mercantile motives for his own gain. The only goal in front of the cyber thief is to steal valuable information from an organization and use it or sell it afterwards for money. In terms of criminal profiling, Nykodym et al. (2005) found that there is a strong pattern in the age of these cyber robbers. If the crime is for less than one hundred thousand dollars, then most likely the attacker is young 20-25 years old, male or female, still in the low hierarchy of the organization. If the crime involves more money, then the committer is probably an older male from a management level in the organization. His crime is not driven by hate or revenge but by greed and hunger for money. 

Computer crime is defined as financial crime in this book. White-collar criminals commit financial crime. Characteristics of white-collar criminals include: • Wealthy yet greedy person • Highly educated yet practical person • Socially connected yet anti-social person • Talks ethics yet acts immoral • Employed by and in a legitimate organization • A person of respectability with high social status • Member of the privileged socioeconomic class • Commit crime within the occupation based on competence • On the slippery slope from legitimate to illegitimate behavior • Often charismatic, convincing and socially skilled • So desperate to succeed that they are willing to use criminal means • Sometimes excited about the thrill of not being uncovered • Often in a position where the police is reluctant to start investigation • Applies resources to hide tracks and crime outcome • Behaves in court in a manner creating sympathy and understanding 

These kinds of characteristics are organized according to criteria in criminal profiling. For example, some of them are individual factors that are grounded in psychology, while others are environmental factors grounded in sociology. In terms of psychological factors, criminal profiling may ask question such as: • What kind of personality types become more easily white-collar criminals? • What are their typical background, life style and development? • What are their values, ideas and ambitions? In terms of sociological factors, criminal profiling may ask questions such as: • How do white-collar criminals look at society and their own role in society? • How do they perceive laws, and what do they consider to be crime and criminals? • How do they participate in networks, and what is associated with status and power? Not all computer criminals are white-collar criminals, but most of them are committing crime for financial gain. Cyber offenders are likely to share a broader range of social characteristics, and the cases of hacking and other Internet-related offences that have been reported in the media would suggest they are likely to be young, clever and fairly lonely individuals who are of middle-class origin, often without prior criminal records, often processing expert knowledge and often motivated by a variety of financial and non-financial goals. Some degree of technical competence is required to commit many computer-related types of crime (Salifu, 2008). 

Some theorists believe that crime can be reduced through the use of deterrents. The goal of deterrence, crime prevention, is based on the assumption that criminals or potential criminals will think carefully before committing a crime if the likelihood of getting caught and/or the fear of swift and severe punishment are present. Based on such belief, general deterrence theory holds that crime can be thwarted by the threat of punishment, while special deterrence theory holds that penalties for criminal acts should be sufficiently severe that convicted criminals will never repeat their acts (Lyman and Potter, 2007). Threat is an external stimulus that exists whether or not an individual perceives it (Johnson and Warkentin, 2010). If an individual perceives the threat, then is has deterrent potential. Deterrence theory postulates that people commit such crimes on the basis of rational calculations about perceived personal benefits, and that the threat of legal sanctions will deter people for fear of punishment (Yusuf and Babalola, 2009). In more recent years when executives have been seen arrested and handcuffed for the purposes of public humiliation, it sets in motion a deterrence model of crime prevention or at the very least, a shaming policy. The purpose of these public arrests are often symbolic and say more about the regulatory agencies need to appear to be legitimately prosecuting corporate wrongdoers. As such, with regulation so closely tied to the political climate, there has been no consistency in the prosecution of corporate criminals, as compared with drug war policies of the past couple of decades (Hansen, 2009).