Spreadsheet tables can be created, complete with calculations, directly in Keynote. Clicking the Table icon in the Toolbar
places a basic three column by three row table onto a slide. The Table Inspector can be used to modify that Table adding
extra rows and columns as needed. The Table Inspector be used to format the Table. However in most circumstances
spreadsheet data is best copied and pasted into slides from iWork’s Numbers.
As Numbers is a dedicated spreadsheet package it offers far more data editing and function control than Keynote. Having
Table creation control in Keynote is great though the primary reason for having this capability is to allow table and chart
data to be modified within Keynote. For instance, if sales figures change immediately before a business presentation, the
table and chart data can be changed in Keynote without the need to locate the original spreadsheet data.
Clicking on any Table Cell that contains a formula invokes the Formula Editor. Once active the Formula Editor can be
used to modify equations. If Numbers is not available, create a simple table, select a cell and press the equals (=) key.
In common with the other iWork applications Keynote runs automatic spell checking. To switch this off go to Edit >
Spelling > Check Spelling As You Type and mark sure it is un–ticked. When on potentially misspelt words are automatically
underlined with a red dotted line. Using the context menu spelling suggestions are offered. The context menu also allows
words to be learnt. To invoke the Context Menu use Right Click or Control Click. This context menu also launches the
Mac’s dictionary and thesaurus, and even links to Wikipedia, or the Google search engine.
To run spell check across a document go to Edit > Spelling >Spelling… The spell check dialogue box appears.
Automatic Corrections can be controlled from Keynotes Preferences. For example typing ‘teh’ will automatically change
to ‘the’. Also, scientific terms or business names can be abbreviated. Here typing ‘mwp’ will automatically change to
Mark Wood | Photography. Genuine fractions can be achieved but only with certain font types. Once enabled Automatic
Corrections, Symbol and Text Substitution will replace 1/3 with ⅓, but only if the chosen font contains glyphs for fractions.
If the chosen font does not contain the required glyph an alternative font is used.
Photographs, Movies and Sound can be added to a Keynote document in one of four different ways.
1. The Media Browser
2. The Insert menu and Choose…
3. Dragging files from Finder
4. Copying and Pasting from other applications
The hassle free method is to use Media Browser, as it connects to other Apple software including iTunes. The available
media will be in a Keynote compatible format. To include files from the Media Browser locate the correct tab for the
media type, either Photos, Movies, Audio, then find the desired file and drag it on to a Keynote slide.
Using the Insert command from the application menu bypasses the need to have files included in the Media Browser, but
be aware that not all picture, movie and audio formats are supported by iWork and Keynote. If a file appears greyed out
in the Finder Import window it means that file format is not supported.
Supported file formats are:
For Pictures – all QuickTime-supported formats, including TIFF, GIF, JPEG, PDF, PSD, EPS, PICT
For Movies and Audio - any QuickTime or iTunes file type, including MOV, MP3, MPEG-4, AIFF and AAC
Supported files can be simply dragged from a Finder window onto a Slide. If the contents of an entire folder are required,
drag the folder from its Finder window onto the Media Browser. For a folder of mixed media, being Pictures, Movies and
Audio this operation will have to be executed three times. Once for each tab of the Media Browser.

If images placed onto slides look too dark or lack contrast Keynote has an Adjust Image control. This is a window that
can be used to adjust the brightness, contrast, saturation and other image parameters directly within Keynote. There
are several image parameters that can be used to finesse imported photographs, though often just clicking the Enhance
button will improve a picture.
Adjust Image is an icon in the Toolbar, or it can be launched from View > Adjust.
By default Keynote’s preferences are set to include audio and movies in the document file. This option, found in the General
tab of Keynote’s Preferences, should be left ticked; its default. This ensures media is saved within Keynote documents.
There is no mechanism for excluding picture data from automatically being saved in Keynote.
Because Keynote embeds media files, presentations can become rather bloated, filling hard drive space. On modern
workstations this is not a big problem but for the fast transmission of a Keynote via a network, file size can jeopardize
smooth playback.
All iWork applications have a Reduce File Size command found in the File menu. Use this to resample media files contained
in Keynote. Caution: do not overwrite, that is save over, the original Keynote file. Using Reduce File Size may reduce the
fidelity of media during resampling. This may not be an issue, but keeping the higher quality Keynote is a sensible precaution.
Global Transitions can be added to slides. They help to indicate a change is taking place. The Dissolve Effect set to two
or three seconds makes a pleasing transition from one picture slide to another. With so many transitions it is all too easy
to overload a presentation with effects, and so obscure the intended message.
Often transitions are triggered by a click, though they can also be set to change after a time delay. Mixing click-triggered
transitions with time-delayed transitions can be confusing to a presenter. It is probably best to use click-triggering and
no delays because often when a computer appears unresponsive users start clicking freely and frustratedly.