 An intelligence strategy is needed for business intelligence. Business intelligence is a process of taking large amounts of data, analyzing that data, and presenting a high-level set of reports that condense the essence of that data into the basis of business actions. Business intelligence can enable management to gain new insights and thereby contributing to their business decisions to prevent computer crime and to strengthen corporate reputation. 

Traditionally, intelligence was understood to mean information from criminals about criminal activity by a covert source. Today, intelligence is a systematic approach to collecting information with the purpose, for example, of tracking and predicting crime to improve law enforcement (Brown et al., 2004). Intelligence analysts investigate who is committing crimes, how, when, where and why. They then provide recommendations on how to stop or curb the offences. As part of this, analysts produce profiles of crime problems and individual targets, and produce both strategic (overall, long-term) and tactical (specific, short-term) assessments within the confines set by the policing unit. 

The aim of intelligence strategy is to continue to develop intelligence led policing in all parts of an organization, a nation or in all regions of the world. An intelligence strategy provides a framework for a structured problem solving and partnership enhanced approach, based around a common model. For example, the National Intelligence Model in the UK is a structured approach to improve intelligence led policing both centrally and locally in policing districts such as the South Yorkshire Police (SYPIS, 2007). Intelligence-led policing is carried out in many law enforcement areas. For example, intelligence-led vehicle crime reduction was carried out in the West Surrey police area in the UK. Analysis of vehicle crime included identifying (Brown et al., 2004): • Locations (hotspots, streets, car parks, postcodes, wards, etc.) of vehicle crime, • Sites where vehicles were dumped, • Times of offences, • Prolific vehicle crime offenders, • Areas where prolific offenders were identified as offending, • Models of vehicles targeted for vehicle crime, • Type of property stolen in theft from vehicle offences. The analysis resulted in problem profiles, which identified emerging patterns of crime. These patterns included vehicle crime occurring in beauty spot car parks and the theft of badges from cars. Such information was disseminated to local officers to act on. Intelligence-led policing is defined as a business model and a management philosophy according to Ratcliffe (2008: 89): Intelligence-led policing is a business model and managerial philosophy where data analysis and crime intelligence are pivotal to an objective, decision-making framework that facilitates crime and problem reduction, disruption and prevention through both strategic management and effective enforcement strategies that target prolific and serious offenders. 

An interesting case of intelligence-led policing in the UK was the project called "Operation Gallant" that lead to a reduction of 17% in car thefts. Operation Gallant involved all Basic Command Unit (BCU) in the collection and analysis of information (Brown et al., 2004: 2): In the case of Operation Gallant, the intelligence-led vehicle crime reduction approach involved the activity of officers from across a BCU. A crime analyst, dedicated solely to examine vehicle crime patterns and trends, developed a detailed picture of vehicle crime in the area, including analysis of time, location, vehicle type and known offenders. As a result of this strategic analysis, a number of interventions were planned, drawing heavily upon the Operation Igneous tactical menu. The most significant, in terms of resources devoted to the operation, involved a program of prolific offender targeting and crime prevention advice targeted towards the owners of high-risk vehicles. The substantial decline in car crimes were explained by the increased attention paid to this crime sector (Brown et al., 2004: 16): Given the fact that the first reduction coincides with the commencement of the planning process for Operation Gallant, this may also reflect an anticipatory effect in which the very act of planning and talking about an operation leads to a decline. 

In intelligence work for investigating and preventing white-collar crime, a variety of information sources are available. Sheptycki (2007) list the following information sources in policing for general corporate social responsibility work: victim reports, witness reports, police reports, crime scene examinations, historical data held by police agencies (such as criminal records), prisoner debriefings, technical or human surveillance products, suspicious financial transactions reporting, and reports emanating from undercover police operations. Similarly, internal investigation units in business organizations can apply intelligence sources. Intelligence analysis may also refer to governmental records of other governmental departments and agencies, and other more open sources of information may be used in elaborate intelligence assessment. Most of the information used to prevent and investigate financial crime is sensitive, complex, and the result of time consuming tasks (Wilhelmsen, 2009). However, Sheptycki (2007) found that most crime analysis is organized around existing investigation and prevention sector data. Intelligence analysis is typically framed by already existing institutional ways of thinking. He argues that organized crime notification, classification and measurement schemes tend to reify pre-existing notions of traditional policing practice. In this perspective, it is important for strategic criminal analysts to be aware of the variety of information sources available. We choose to classify information sources into the following categories in this book: 1. Interview. By means of interrogation of witnesses, suspects, reference persons and experts, information is collected on crimes, criminals, times and places, organizations, criminal projects, activities, roles, etc. 

2. Network. By means of informants in the criminal underworld as well as in legal businesses, information is collected on actors, plans, competitors, markets, customers, etc. Informants often have connections with persons that are an investigating colleague would not be able to approach formally. 3. Location. By analyzing potential and actual crime scenes and potential criminal scenes, information are collected on criminal procedures, preferences, crime evolution, etc. Hot spots and traces are found. Secret ransacking of suspicious places is part of this information source. Pictures in terms of crime scene photographs are important information elements. 4. Documents. By studying documents from confiscations may provide information on ownership, transactions, accounts, etc. An example is forensic accounting, which is the application of accounting tasks for an evidentiary purpose. Forensic accounting is the action of identifying, recording, settling, extracting, sorting, reporting and verifying past financial data or other accounting activities for settling current or prospective legal disputes or using such past financial data for projecting future financial data to settle legal disputes. Forensic accountants are essential to the legal system, providing expert services such as fake invoicing valuations, suspicious bankruptcy valuations, and analysis of financial documents in fraud schemes (Curtis, 2008).