It is generally acknowledged in Artificial Intelligence research that search is crucial to building intelligent systems and for the design of intelligent agents. For example, Newell (1994) has stated that search is fundamental for intelligent behaviour (see the quote at the beginning of this chapter). From a behavioural perspective, search can be considered to be a meta-behaviour where the agent is making a decision on which behaviour amongst a set of possible behaviours to execute in a given situation. In other words, it can be defined as the behavioural process that the agent employs in order to make decisions about which choice of actions it should perform in order to carry out a specific task. The task may include higher-level cognitive behaviours such as learning, strategy, goal-setting, planning, and modelling (these were called Action Selection in Reynold’s Boids model). If there are no decisions to be made, then searching is not required. If the agent already knows that a particular set of actions, or behaviour, is appropriate for a given situation, then there is no need to search for the appropriate behaviour, and therefore the actions can be applied without coming to any decision. Searching can be considered to be a behaviour that an agent exhibits when it has insufficient knowledge in order to solve a problem. The problem is defined by the current situation of the agent, which is determined by the environmental conditions, its own circumstances and the knowledge the agent currently has available to it. If the agent has insufficient knowledge in order to solve a given problem, then it may choose to search for further knowledge about the problem. If it already has sufficient knowledge, it will not need to employ searching behaviour in order to solve the problem. An agent uses search behaviour in order to answer a question it does not already know the answer to or complete a task it does not know how to complete. The agent must explore an environment by following more than one path in order to obtain that knowledge. 

The exploration of the environment is carried out in a manner analogous to early explorers of the American or Australian continents, or people exploring a garden maze such as the Hampton Court Palace Maze or the Chevening House Maze. For the two garden mazes, the people trying to get to the centre of the maze must employ search behaviour if they do not have the knowledge about where it is. If they take a map with them, however, they no longer have to use search behaviour as the map provides them with the knowledge of which paths to take to get to the centre. The early American explorers Lewis and Clark were instructed by Thomas Jefferson to explore the Missouri and find a water route across the continent to the Pacific. They did not already know how large the continent was or what was out there and needed to physically explore the land. They chose to head in a westerly then north-westerly direction following a path along the Missouri river. Similarly, the Australian explorers Burke and Wills led an expedition starting from Melbourne with the goal of reaching the Gulf of Carpentaria. The land at the time had yet to be explored by European settlers. The expedition were prevented from reaching their ultimate goal just three miles short of the northern coastline due to mangrove swamps and, worse still, the expedition leaders died on the return journey. When performing a search, an agent can adopt different behaviours that determine the way the search is performed. The search behaviour adopted can have a significant impact on the effectiveness of the search. For example, poor leadership was blamed for the unsuccessful Burke and Wills expedition. The behaviour can be thought of as a strategy the agent adopts when performing the search. We can consider these search behaviours from an embodied agent perspective. The type of search behaviour is determined both by the embodiment of the agent, and whether the agent employs a reactive or more cognitive behaviour when executing the search. We have already seen many examples of how an agent can perform a search of an environment as a side effect of employing purely reactive behaviour (see Section 5.4 and Figures 5.2, 5.7 to 5.10 and 6.9). We can term these types of search behaviours as reactive search. We can also use the term cognitive search for cases when an agent has an ability to recognize that there is a choice to be made when a choice presents itself in the environment (such as when the agent reaches a junction in the maze). As stated in section 5.5, this act of recognition is a fundamental part of cognitive-based searching behaviour, and it is related to the situation that the agent finds itself in, the way its body is moving and interacting with the environment. It is also related to what is happening in the environment externally, and/or what is happening with other agents in the same environment if there are any. In addition, a single agent can be used to perform any given search, but there is nothing stopping us from using more than one agent to perform the search. We can adopt a multi-agent perspective to describe how each particular search can be performed in order to clarify how the searches differ. In this case, the effectiveness of a particular search can be evaluated by comparing the number of agents that are needed to perform the search and the amount of information that is communicated between them. 

There are many problems that require search with varying degrees of difficulty. Simplified or ‘toy’ problems are problems that are to the most part synthetic and unrelated to real life. However, these problems can be useful to designers in gaining insight into the problem of search. Once the properties of the different search behaviours have been investigated on toy problems, then they can be adapted and/or scaled up to real life problems. To illustrate different search problems, this section describes three problems in particular that have been simulated in NetLogo – these are the Searching Mazes model, the Missionaries and Cannibals model, and the Searching for Kevin Bacon model.