Another kind of “compliance” is compliance with the rules of court procedure.
In the early stages of a civil case, each side is required to supply the other with copies of any
documentation potentially relevant to the issues under dispute, so that the lawsuit can be settled
by reference to the relative merits of either side’s case rather than by who happens to have the
most telling pieces of evidence in their hands. The traditional term for this process was discovery.
In Britain this was officially changed in 1999 to disclosure, but “discovery” is still current in the
rest of the English-speaking world. Because the new, electronic version of this process has
developed much further to date in the USA than in Britain, the term e-discovery is commonly
used on both sides of the Atlantic, and I shall use it here (though e-disclosure is sometimes used
in Britain).
Before the IT revolution, discovery involved legal complexities, relating for instance to classes of
document (such as letters between an organization and its lawyers) which were exempt from
discovery, or privileged; but it posed no great practical problems. Correspondence on paper was
filed in ways that made it fairly straightforward to locate relevant material. Phone calls were not
normally recorded, so the question of discovery did not arise.
This changed with the arrival of e-mail. An e-mail can be saved, in which case in principle it is as
subject to the discovery process as a letter or inter-office memo on paper. But e-mails are far
more numerous, and they tend to be dealt with directly by the people they are addressed to rather
than by secretaries who are skilled at organizing filing systems. Many people file e-mails
chaotically, or at least idiosyncratically. An e-mail may not be saved by the person it was sent to
but may still be retrievable from backup tapes, held at department or organization level – in
which case the messages that matter will probably be mixed up with a great deal of irrelevant
material. So “e-discovery” is challenging in a practical way, apart from any legal niceties involved.
The main reason why e-discovery is a hot topic is that American courts have begun awarding
large sums in damages against organizations that fail to produce comprehensive collections of
electronic documentation.
The first significant example was the 2005 case Laura Zubulake v. UBS (Union Bank of
Switzerland, then Europe’s largest bank). Laura Zubulake was an equities trader earning about
$650,000 a year at the New York branch of UBS; she was sacked, and sued her employer for sex
discrimination. She was awarded about $29 million, part of which was compensation for loss of
earnings but $20 million of which was “punitive damages” connected with the fact that UBS had
failed to produce all the e-mails demanded by her lawyers – backup tapes from years past were
restored to retrieve the material, but some relevant material had gone missing despite instructions
given that it should be preserved. Then in Coleman (Parent) Holdings Inc. v. Morgan Stanley
(2005) the plaintiff was awarded $1.45 billion, including $850 million in punitive damages for
similar reasons – this was reversed on appeal, but the huge initial award shows the risk that firms
now face.
In both of these cases there were claims that adverse electronic evidence had deliberately been
destroyed. But UBS seems to have been punished in Zubulake less for actively destroying
evidence than for failing to put in place adequate mechanisms to ensure preservation of relevant
material – something which is technically not at all easy to achieve, when items are scattered
across directories on different servers (together with portable PDAs, memory sticks, laptops, etc.)
in a complex computing environment, and when the items may be of very diverse kinds (not just
e-mails but, for instance, voicemails, blogs, spreadsheets, videoconferences).
Zubulake and Coleman were at least concerned with very large sums of money. But e-discovery
in the USA is becoming a large problem in lesser cases. In a linked pair of cases reported as
ongoing in New Jersey in 2008, Beye v. Horizon and Foley v. Horizon, where a health-insurance
company was resisting paying for two teenagers’ treatments for anorexia on the ground that it
might be psychological in origin, the company demanded
to see practically everything the teenagers had said on their Facebook and MySpace
profiles, in instant-messaging threads, text messages, e-mails, blog posts and whatever
else the girls might have done online … [The court supported this demand, so] hard disks
and web pages are being scoured in order for the case to proceed.67
Rebecca Love Kourlis, formerly a judge and now director of the academic Institute for the
Advancement of the American Legal System, sees cases being settled out of court rather than
fought to a conclusion purely because one side cannot afford the costs of e-discovery.
What is more, the difficulties of e-discovery do not fall solely on the side giving the material.
The receiving side then has the problem of winnowing nuggets of evidence that can actually be
used to strengthen its case out of a sea of irrelevancies, peripheral material, duplicate copies,
near-duplicates, messages about other people with the same surname, and so forth.
Malcolm Wheeler describes e-discovery as “the single most significant change to the legal
system” in his forty years as an American business lawyer.68 American companies are having to
take radical steps to impose discipline on their internal communication practices, so that they will
be equal to the e-discovery challenge if it arises – waiting until they are hit by a lawsuit is seen as
unworkable. One suggestion, for instance, is to prohibit any use of company servers for personal
e-mail – surely a draconian rule, considering how much of people’s waking lives is spent at work.
A legal organization, the Sedona Conference, has been developing “Best Practice Guidelines …
for Managing Information and Records in the Electronic Age” (over a hundred pages in the 2005
version), and American courts are treating compliance with the Sedona guidelines as a test of
whether an organization is meeting its discovery obligations. The court system of England and
Wales revised its rules on discovery (or “disclosure”) in 2005 in line with the Sedona principles
for electronic documents.
The English rules do differ from the American rules, in ways that mean that e-discovery in
England will not lead either to such vast quantities of electronic material being handed over, or to
eye-catching punitive damages awards. An English court would not require the level of discovery
we saw in Beye and Foley v. Horizon.