Communication may be defined as the process of sharing or exchanging of information between agents. An agent exhibits communicating behaviour when it attempts to transmit information to another agent. A sender agent or agents transmits a message through some medium to a receiver agent or agents. The term communication in common English usage can also refer to interactions between people that involve the sharing of information, ideas and feelings. Communication is not unique to humans, though, since animals and even plants also have the ability to communicate with each other. Language can be defined as the set of symbols that agents communicate with in order to convey information. In Artificial Intelligence, human language is often called ‘natural language’ in order to distinguish it from computer programming languages. Communicating using language is often considered to be a uniquely human behavioural trait. Human language, such as spoken, written or sign, is distinguished from animal communication systems in that it is learned rather than inherited biologically. Although various animals exhibit the ability to communicate, and some animals such as orangutans and chimpanzees even have the ability to use certain features of human language, it is the degree of sophistication and complexity in human language that distinguishes it from animal communication systems. Human language is based on the unique ability of humans to think abstractly, using symbols to represent concepts and ideas. Language is defined by a set of socially shared rules that define the commonly accepted symbols, their meaning and their structural relationships specified by rules of grammar. These rules describe how the symbols can be manipulated to create a potentially infinite number of grammatically correct symbol sequences. The specific symbols chosen are arbitrary and can be associated with any particular phoneme, grapheme or sign. 

Linguistics is the scientific study of language which can be split into separate areas of study: grammar is the study of language structure; morphology is the study of how words are formed and put together; phonology is the study of systems of sounds; syntax concerns the rules governing how words combine into phrases and sentences; semantics is the study of meaning; and pragmatics concerns the study of language and use and the contexts in which it is used. 

In all natural languages, there is a wide variation in usage as well as frequent lack of agreement amongst language users. For example, Table 7.1 lists some examples of acceptable ‘English’ sentences from various regions of the world (Newbrook, 2009). Each of the sentences is regarded as ‘normal’ English for the region shown on the right, and yet most people outside those regions would argue differently, and in many cases have difficulty in understanding their meaning. 

Concerning the English language, David Crystal (1988) states: “The English language stretches around the world: from Australia to Zimbabwe, over 300 million people speak it as their mother tongue alone… And yet, despite its astonishingly widespread use as a medium of communication, every profession and every province – indeed, every individual person – uses a slightly different variant.” English has many different regional dialects (such as American, British, Australian and New Zealand English), as well as many sub-dialects within those regions. There are also dialects that cut across regional lines, for example, “Public School English” in Britain, Black English in America and Maori English in New Zealand. And in every country, there are countless social variations that “possess their own bewildering variety of cants, jargons and lingoes” (Claiborne 1990, page 20). One of the more colourful examples is a dictionary on Wall Street slang entitled High steppers, fallen angels, and lollipops (Odean, 1989). It illustrates how such language can become almost unintelligible to the uninitiated. (For example, what is a ‘high stepper’ or a ‘fallen angel’?) Hudson (1983, page 69) writes the following in The language of the teenage revolution about the resentment of older people to the language used by contemporary teenagers : “… perhaps, they dislike the fact that teenagers speak another kind of language, using a considerable number of expressions which they themselves find either incomprehensible or repulsive.” As well as language being diverse, there are many different ways that language is expressed and used. Spoken language is markedly different from written language, as illustrated from the following example taken from Crystal (1981): “This is part of a lecture, and I chose it because it shows that even a professional speaker uses structure that would rarely if ever occur in written English, and displays a ‘disjointedness’ of speech that would be altogether lacking there. (Everyday conversation provides even more striking differences.) The dot (.) indicates a short pause, the dash a longer pause, and the erm is an attempt to represent the noises the speaker made when he was audibly hesitating. … – and I want . very arbitrarily if I may to divide this into three headings --- and to ask . erm . three questions . assessment why – assessment of what – and assessment how . so this is really . means I want to talk about . first of all the purposes of assessment – why we are assessing at all – erm secondly the kind of functions and processes that are being assessed – and thirdly I want to talk about techniques – …” Baugh (1957, page 17) reminds us that language is not just “the printed page” relatively uniform and fixed, as many people think it to be. Language is “primarily speech” and writing “only a conventional device for recoding sounds.” He further states that as the repeated muscular movements which generate speech are subject to gradual alteration on the part of the speaker: “each individual is constantly and quite unconsciously introducing slight changes in his speech. There is no such thing as uniformity in language. Not only does the speech of one community differ from that of another, but the speech of different individuals of a single community, even different members of the same family, is marked by individual peculiarities.” 

Some other distinctive forms of language are, for example, poetry, legal documents, newspaper reporting, advertising, letter writing, office correspondence, telegrams, telephone conversations, electronic mail, Usenet news articles, scientific papers and political speeches. Each has their own flavour, quirks and style. And within each form there are individual authors who have their own distinctive styles of language. The plays of Shakespeare and the science fiction novels of H. G. Wells are two examples of very distinct literary styles. In fact, every single person has their own style of language, or idiolect with its own unique characteristics that can be readily discerned by other people (Fromkin et al., 1990).