As its name implies control engineering involves the design of an engineering product or system
where a requirement is to accurately control some quantity, say the temperature in a room or the
position or speed of an electric motor. To do this one needs to know the value of the quantity
being controlled, so that being able to measure is fundamental to control. In principle one can
control a quantity in a so called open loop manner where ‘knowledge’ has been built up on what
input will produce the required output, say the voltage required to be input to an electric motor
for it to run at a certain speed. This works well if the ‘knowledge’ is accurate but if the motor is
driving a pump which has a load highly dependent on the temperature of the fluid being pumped
then the ‘knowledge’ will not be accurate unless information is obtained for different fluid
temperatures. But this may not be the only practical aspect that affects the load on the motor and
therefore the speed at which it will run for a given input, so if accurate speed control is required
an alternative approach is necessary.
This alternative approach is the use of feedback whereby the quantity to be controlled, say C, is
measured, compared with the desired value, R, and the error between the two,
E = R - C used to adjust C. This gives the classical feedback loop structure of Figure 1.1.
In the case of the control of motor speed, where the required speed, R, known as the reference is
either fixed or moved between fixed values, the control is often known as a regulatory control, as
the action of the loop allows accurate speed control of the motor for the aforementioned situation
in spite of the changes in temperature of the pump fluid which affects the motor load. In other
instances the output C may be required to follow a changing R, which for example, might be the
required position movement of a robot arm. The system is then often known as a
servomechanism and many early textbooks in the control engineering field used the word
servomechanism in their title rather than control.
The use of feedback to regulate a system has a long history [1.1, 1.2], one of the earliest concepts,
used in Ancient Greece, was the float regulator to control water level, which is still used today in
water tanks. The first automatic regulator for an industrial process is believed to have been the
flyball governor developed in 1769 by James Watt. It was not, however, until the wartime period
beginning in 1939, that control engineering really started to develop with the demand for
servomechanisms for munitions fire control and guidance. With the major improvements in
technology since that time the applications of control have grown rapidly and can be found in all
walks of life. Control engineering has, in fact, been referred to as the ‘unseen technology’ as so
often people are unaware of its existence until something goes wrong. Few people are, for
instance, aware of its contribution to the development of storage media in digital computers
where accurate head positioning is required. This started with the magnetic drum in the 50’s and
is required today in disk drives where position accuracy is of the order of 1μm and movement
between tracks must be done in a few ms.
Feedback is, of course, not just a feature of industrial control but is found in biological, economic
and many other forms of system, so that theories relating to feedback control can be applied to
many walks of life.
The book is concerned with theoretical methods for continuous linear feedback control system
design, and is primarily restricted to single-input single-output systems. Continuous linear time
invariant systems have linear differential equation mathematical models and are always an
approximation to a real device or system. All real systems will change with time due to age and
environmental changes and may only operate reasonably linearly over a restricted range of
operation. There is, however, a rich theory for the analysis of linear systems which can provide
excellent approximations for the analysis and design of real world situations when used within
the correct context. Further simulation is now an excellent means to support linear theoretical
studies as model errors, such as the affects of neglected nonlinearity, can easily be assessed.
There are total of 11 chapters and some appendices, the major one being Appendix A on Laplace
transforms. The next chapter provides a brief description of the forms of mathematical model
representations used in control engineering analysis and design. It does not deal with
mathematical modelling of engineering devices, which is a huge subject and is best dealt with in
the discipline covering the subject, since the devices or components could be electrical,
mechanical, hydraulic etc. Suffice to say that one hopes to obtain an approximate linear
mathematical model for these components so that their effect in a system can be investigated
using linear control theory. The mathematical models discussed are the linear differential
equation, the transfer function and a state space representation, together with the notations used
for them in MATLAB.
Chapter 3 discusses transfer functions, their zeros and poles, and their responses to different
inputs. The following chapter discusses in detail the various methods for plotting steady state
frequency responses with Bode, Nyquist and Nichols plots being illustrated in MATLAB.
Hopefully sufficient detail, which is brief when compared with many textbooks, is given so that
the reader clearly understands the information these plots provide and more importantly
understands the form of frequency response expected from a specific transfer function.
The material of chapters 2-4 could be covered in other courses as it is basic systems theory, there
having been no mention of control, which starts in chapter 5. The basic feedback loop structure
shown in Figure 1.1 is commented on further, followed by a discussion of typical performance
specifications which might have to be met in both the time and frequency domains. Steady state
errors are considered both for input and disturbance signals and the importance and properties of
an integrator are discussed from a physical as well as mathematical viewpoint. The chapter
concludes with a discussion on stability and a presentation of several results including the
Mikhailov criterion, which is rarely mentioned in English language texts.