It is said the future of publishing rests with iPad and its like; there is a lot of money being invested in it and ways to make money from ePub, iOS and Android Apps. For those wishing to make free content available on multiple platforms creating interactive PDFs is a safe option. Later I’ll illustrate how to generate ePUB content. Comparing these options will allow you to assess the merits of PDF versus ePUB.
This section illustrates how to use Pages, style-sheets and hyperlinks to create a PDF with internal hyperlinked navigation that can be synced via iTunes to an iPad, or similar. PDF syncing via iTunes is really for single-users but it’s included so you’ll have a quick way to test your PDF on iPAD before distributing it. We’ll also look at setting up a Print PDF to Tunes option as any printable document on a Mac can be synced via iTunes to iOS’s Book App. The Book App is the default book reading software for iPad, iPhones and iPod Touch.
Launch Pages and from the Template Chooser select a Word Processing, Blank portrait orientation document. Go to File > Page Setup… or selecting Page Setup… in the Document tab of the Document Inspector check the Document format. In Europe that’s likely to be A4. You can also create the iPad 4:3 ratio document.
To create the iPad 4:3 ratio chose Manage Custom Sizes from Page Size in Page Setup… and enter appropriate values.
Part of this exercise investigates navigation. For this we need multiple pages. On page one type ‘Contents’ then go to the Insert menu and chose Page Break. This makes a second page, here type Chapter 1, repeat the Page Break and typing exercise three more times, adding the text ‘Chapters 2, 3 and 4’ at the top of each page of your document.
With long documents use page thumbnails. To show Page Thumbnails use the View button in the Tool Bar. This makes navigating long documents much easier. Click Page Two. From the Tool Bar click Media Browser icon, labelled Media and from the Media Browser panel select the Photos tab. Hopefully you’ll have pictures in iPhoto or Aperture; they’ll appear here if you do. Drag one onto your document. You could add video or audio from the Media Browser also.
Insert some sample text, I’ve used the sampler Lorem Ipsum. Use anything you can find to fill out out the document. I inserted text into Chapter 2, then typed in three subheadings, called Sections 1, 2 and 3. This gives a second tier to the navigation scheme.
Use Paragraph Styles. Navigate back to where you typed Chapter 1. Triple-click to select that line. Then from the Format Bar choose Heading 1 from paragraph style. (See the screen grab for its location.) Then navigate to where you typed Chapter 2, 3, and 4 and add the Heading 1 paragraph style to them.
Now go back to where you typed the words Section 1 and triple click those words and apply the Heading 2 paragraph style. Repeat this operation for the other sub-headers. 
The primary navigation for the PDF comes from creating a Table Of Contents. Go back to the first page. Make sure the text insertion point is blinking just after the word Contents. Then press the return key. From the Insert Menu choose Table Of Contents. Pages’ Document Inspector jumps to the TOC tab.
Have a good look at this. Both Heading 1 and 2 are ticked, as is Make Page Numbers Links. By default Pages adds hyperlinks to the Table Of Contents, allowing you to jump to any of your Chapters or Section Headers, just by clicking on a page number. However, once you jump away from the Table Of Contents there is no link back.
To make the link back, double-click the word Contents you typed on page 1. From the Insert Menu choose Bookmark. Note: you are not stuck with the fonts and formatting of Headers and Table Of Contents as they can be changed and their styles sheets refreshed.
With the Contents page Bookmarked you can use the document’s Footer to add the usual stuff; page number, page count et cetera, but in addition type ‘Link To Contents Page’. Then on the Link Inspector choose the Hyperlink tab. Select the words ‘Link To Contents Page’. With the text selected click the Enable As A Hyperlink button on the Link Inspector. The Link To: menu in the Inspector becomes active so choose Bookmark. Then, from Name: choose Contents. You’ve now created a link back to the Table Of Contents. Your Pages document now has a navigation system. Only text elements can be made into a hyperlink.
In a real world situation you will probably have taken time to add images throughout your document. This increases file size, and slows down page loading times. Save a new version of your Pages document; this preserves the higher resolution version on the Pages document. Using the duplicate copy go to File and Reduce File Size. Pages shows a dialogue box listing the file size reduction.
There are two options to Share As PDF. File > Export… or Share > Export, both open the Export dialogue box. Click PDF and experiment between Better and Best quality for further file size reduction. Also open the Security Options disclosure triangle to review PDF security options. Stopping copying from the document is worth considering (note this Bookboon Book doesn’t allow text to be copied). Click Next, save the PDF then open it in Preview.
In Preview you can text the hyperlink navigation and assess image quality. Once you’re happy you can Print the PDF to iTunes. Stay in Preview, as this PDF has been optimised. Earlier I mentioned I’d added an iTunes option to the PDF menu, this is how to do it.
Go to File > Print. In the Print dialogue box click on the PDF menu, bottom left, and chose Edit Menu.
Download free ebooks at bookboon.com Please click the advert iWork - Pages 59 Sharing Your Work Go to File > Print. In the Print dialogue box click on the PDF menu, bottom left, and chose Edit Menu. 
Click the + symbol in the Edit PDF Menu. A Finder window appears. Use it to navigate to your Applications folder and double-click your iTunes app.