Control systems exist in many fields of engineering so that components of a control system may
be electrical, mechanical, hydraulic etc. devices. If a system has to be designed to perform in a
specific way then one needs to develop descriptions of how the outputs of the individual
components, which make up the system, will react to changes in their inputs. This is known as
mathematical modelling and can be done either from the basic laws of physics or from
processing the input and output signals in which case it is known as identification. Examples of
physical modelling include deriving differential equations for electrical circuits involving
resistance, inductance and capacitance and for combinations of masses, springs and dampers in
mechanical systems. It is not the intent here to derive models for various devices which may be
used in control systems but to assume that a suitable approximation will be a linear differential
equation. In practice an improved model might include nonlinear effects, for example Hooke’s
Law for a spring in a mechanical system is only linear over a certain range; or account for time
variations of components. Mathematical models of any device will always be approximate, even
if nonlinear effects and time variations are also included by using more general nonlinear or time
varying differential equations. Thus, it is always important in using mathematical models to have
an appreciation of the conditions under which they are valid and to what accuracy.
Starting therefore with the assumption that our model is a linear differential equation then in
general it will have the form:-
where D denotes the differential operator d/dt. A(D) and B(D) are polynomials in D with
Di  d i / dt i , the ith derivative, u(t) is the model input and y(t) its output. So that one can write
where the a and b coefficients will be real numbers. The orders of the polynomials A and B are
assumed to be n and m, respectively, with n   m.
Thus, for example, the differential equation
with the dependence of y and u on t assumed can be written 

In order to solve an nth order differential equation, that is determine the output y for a given input
u, one must know the initial conditions of y and its first n-1 derivatives. For example if a
projectile is falling under gravity, that is constant acceleration, so that D2y= constant, where y is
the height, then in order to find the time taken to fall to a lower height, one must know not only
the initial height, normally assumed to be at time zero, but the initial velocity, dy/dt, that is two
initial conditions as the equation is second order (n = 2). Control engineers typically study
solutions to differential equations using either Laplace transforms or a state space representation.
A short introduction to the Laplace transformation is given in Appendix A for the reader who is
not familiar with its use. It is an integral transformation and its major, but not sole use, is for
differential equations where the independent time variable t is transformed to the complex
variable s by the expression
Since the exponential term has no units the units of s are seconds-1, that is using mks notation s
has units of s-1. If denotes the Laplace transform then one may write
[f(t)] = F(s) and -1[F(s)] = f(t). The relationship is unique in that for every f(t), [F(s)], there is a
unique F(s), [f(t)]. It is shown in Appendix A that when the n-1 initial conditions, Dn-1y(0) are
zero the Laplace transform of Dny(t) is snY(s). Thus the Laplace transform of the differential
equation (2.1) with zero initial conditions can be written
with the assumed notation that signals as functions of time are denoted by lower case letters and
as functions of s by the corresponding capital letter.
If equation (2.8) is written
then this is known as the transfer function, G(s), between the input and output of the ‘system’,
that is whatever is modelled by equation (2.1). B(s), of order m, is referred to as the numerator
polynomial and A(s), of order n, as the denominator polynomial and are from equations (2.2) and
(2.3)
Since the a and b coefficients of the polynomials are real numbers the roots of the polynomials
are either real or complex pairs. The transfer function is zero for those values of s which are the
roots of B(s), so these values of s are called the zeros of the transfer function. Similarly, the
transfer function will be infinite at the roots of the denominator polynomial A(s), and these values
are called the poles of the transfer function. The general transfer function (2.9) thus has m zeros
and n poles and is said to have a relative degree of n-m, which can be shown from physical
realisation considerations cannot be negative. Further for n > m it is referred to as a strictly
proper transfer function and for n   m as a proper transfer function.
When the input u(t) to the differential equation of (2.1) is constant the output y(t) becomes
constant when all the derivatives of the output are zero. Thus the steady state gain, or since the
input is often thought of as a signal the term d.c. gain (although it is more often a voltage than a
current!) is used, and is given by
If the n roots of A(s) are  i , i = 1….n and of B(s) are  j, j = 1….m, then the transfer function may
be written in the zero-pole form
When the transfer function is known in the zero-pole form then the location of its zeros and poles
can be shown on an s plane zero-pole plot, where the zeros are marked with a circle and the poles
by a cross. The information on this plot then completely defines the transfer function apart from
the gain K. In most instances engineers prefer to keep any complex roots in quadratic form, thus
for example writing
