Just as for movement in the previous chapter, our body, mind and senses form the basis of many common metaphors used in human language. Our understanding as humans is derived from fundamental concepts related to our physical embodiment in the real world, and the senses we use to perceive it. We often express and understand abstract concepts that we cannot sense directly based on these fundamental concepts. Table 5.1 provides a list of common phrases that illustrates this. 

Traditionally, using a classification first attributed to Aristotle, the five main senses are considered to be sight, hearing, smell, taste and touch (as included in Table 5.1). Sometimes people also refer to a ‘sixth sense’ (also sometimes called extra sensory perception or ESP) – we can consider the term as a metaphor that people use in natural language for describing unconscious thought processes in terms of another sense. It is a mistake to consider a ‘sixth sense’ as being real, as there is very little scientific evidence to support it. However, our bodies do in fact have much more than just the five basic senses as shown by the selection in Table 5.2. 

From a design perspective, we can consider every agent to be embodied in some manner, using senses to gain information about its environment. We can define embodiment in the following manner. An autonomous agent is embodied through some manifestation that allows it to sense its environment. Its embodiment concerns its physical body that it uses to move around its environment, its sensors that it uses to gain information about itself in relation to the environment, and its brain that it uses to process sensory information. The agent exists as part of the environment, and its perception and actions are determined by the way it interacts with the environment and other agents through its embodiment in a dynamic process. 

The agent’s embodiment may consist of a physical manifestation in the real world, such as a human, industrial robot or an autonomous vehicle, or it can have a simulated or artificial manifestation in a virtual environment. If it deals exclusively with abstract information, for example a web crawling agent such as Googlebot, then its environment can be considered from a design perspective to be represented by an n-dimensional space, and its sensing capabilities relate to its movement around that space. Likewise, a real environment for a human or robotic agent can be considered to be an n-dimensional space, and the agent’s embodiment relates to its ability to gain information about the real environment as it moves around. We can consider an agent’s body as a sensory input-capturing device. For example, the senses in a human body is dictated by its embodiment – that is, the entire body itself has numerous sensors that occur throughout the body, enabling our mind to get a ‘picture’ of the whole body as it interacts with the environment (see the image at the beginning of this chapter). Pfeiffer and Scheier (1999) stress the important role that embodiment and sensory-motor coordination has to play in determining intelligent behaviour (see quote also at the beginning of this chapter). Craig Reynolds (1999) describes further features of autonomous agents that can be used to distinguish various classes of autonomous agents such as situatedness and reactive behaviour. We can define situatedness in the following manner. An autonomous agent is situated within its environment, sharing it with other agents and objects. Therefore its behaviour is determined from a first-person perspective by its agent-to-agent interactions and agent-to-environment interactions. Autonomous agents exhibit a range of behaviours, from purely reactive to more deliberative or cognitive. 

An autonomous agent is said to be situated in an environment shared by other agents and/or other objects. An agent can be isolated existing by itself, for example a data mining agent searching for patterns in a database, situated in an abstract n-dimensional space that represents the database environment. A situated agent can have a range of behaviours, from purely reactive where the agent is governed by the stimulus it receives from its senses, to cognitive, where the agent deliberates on the stimulus it receives and decides on appropriate courses of actions. With a purely reactive approach, there is less need for the agent to maintain a representation of the environment – the environment is its own database that it can simply ‘look up’ by interacting directly with it. A cognitive agent, on the other hand, uses representations of what is happening in the environment in order to make decisions. (We can think of these as maps as discussed in the previous chapter). Reynolds notes that combinations of the attributes embodied, situated and reactive define distinct classes of autonomous agents, some of which are shown in Table 5.3. However, unlike Reynolds, we will consider that all agents are both situated in some environment (be it a real, virtual or an abstract environment, represented by some n-dimensional space) and embodied with the ability to sense and interact with its environment in some manner, whether explicitly or implicitly. 

We can design NetLogo turtle agents introduced in the previous chapter to include sensing capabilities using the embodied, situated design perspective. One reason for doing this is that we would like to use turtle agents to search mazes (and not just to draw them) in order to demonstrate searching behaviour using animated mapping techniques (see next section 5.4 and also Chapter 8). Searching is an important process that an agent must perform in order to adequately carry out many tasks. However, before the agent is able to search, it must first have the ability to sense objects and other agents that exist in the environment in order to find the object or agent it is searching for. 

We could easily adopt a disembodied solution to maze searching. In this approach, the turtle agent doing the searching simply follows paths whose movement has been pre-defined within the program (like with the maze drawing models described in the previous chapter). An alternative, embodied approach is that the turtle agent is programmed with the ability to ‘look’ at the maze environment, interpret what it ‘sees’, and then choose which path it wants to take, not being restricted to the pre-defined paths that were required for the disembodied solution.