In Chapter 1 I defined a database to be “… an organised, machine-readable collection of symbols, to be
interpreted as a true account of some enterprise.” I also gave this example (extracted from Figure 1.1):
I suggested that those green symbols, organised as they are with respect to the blue ones, might be
understood to mean:
“Student S1, named Anne, is enrolled on course C1.”
In this chapter I explain exactly how such an interpretation can be justified. In fact, I describe the general
method under which data organized in the form of relations is to be interpreted to yield information, as
some people say. This method of interpretation is firmly based in the science of logic. Relational database
theory is based very directly on logic. Predicates and propositions are the fundamental concepts that logic
deals with.
Fortunately, we need to understand only the few basic principles on which logic is founded. You may well
already have a good grasp of the principles in question, but even if you do, please do not skip this chapter.
For one thing, the textbooks on logic do not all use exactly the same terminology and I have chosen the
terms and definitions that seem most suitable for the purpose at hand. For another, I do of course
concentrate on the points that are particularly relevant to relational theory; you need to know which points
those are and to understand exactly why they are so relevant.
Predicates, one might say, are what logic is all about. And yet the textbooks do not speak with one voice
when it comes to pinning down exactly what the term refers to! I choose the definition that appears to me
to fit best, so to speak, with relational database theory. We start by looking again at that possible
interpretation of the symbols S1, Anne, and C1, placed the way they are in Figure 1.1:
“Student S1, named Anne, is enrolled on course C1.”
This is a sentence. Sentences are what human beings typically use to communicate with each other, using
language. We express our interpretations of the data using sentences in human language and we use
relations to organize the data to be interpreted. Logic bridges the gap between relations and sentences.
Our example sentence can be recast into two simpler sentences, “Student S1 is named Anne” and “Student
S1 is enrolled on course C1”. Let’s focus on the second:
The symbols S1 and C1 appear both in this sentence and in the data whose meaning it expresses. Because
they each designate, or refer to, a particular thing S1 a particular student, C1 a particular course they
are called designators. The word Anne is another designator, referring to a particular forename. “An
Introduction to Relational Database Theory” is also a designator, referring to a particular book, and so is,
for example, -7, referring to a particular number.
Now, suppose we replace S1 and C1 in Example 3.1 by another pair of symbols, taken from the same
columns of Figure 1.1 but a different row. Then we might obtain
A pattern is clearly emerging. For every row in Figure 1.1, considering just the columns headed StudentId
and CourseId, we can obtain a sentence in the form of Examples 3.1 and 3.2. The words “Student … is
enrolled on course …” appear in that order in each case and in each case the gaps indicated
by … sometimes called placeholders are replaced by appropriate designators. If we now replace each
placeholder by the name given in the heading of the column from which the appropriate designator is to be
drawn, we obtain this:
Example 3.3 succinctly expresses the way in which the named columns in each row of Figure 1.1 are
probably to be interpreted. And we now know that those names, StudentId and CourseId, in the column
headings are the names of two of the attributes of the relation that Figure 1.1 depicts in tabular form.
Now, the sentences in Examples 3.1 and 3.2 are in fact statements. They state something of which it can
be said, “That is true”, or “That is not true”, or “I believe that”, or “I don’t believe that”.
Not all sentences are statements. A good informal test, in English, to determine whether a sentence is a
statement is to place “Is it true that” in front of it. If the result is a grammatical English question, then the
original sentence is indeed a statement; otherwise it is not. Here are some sentences that are not statements:
•“Let’s all get drunk.”
•“Will you marry me?”
•“Please pass me the salt.”
•“If music be the food of love, play on.”
They each fail the test. In fact one of them is a question itself and the other three are imperatives, but we
have no need of such sentences in our interpretation of relations because we seek only information, in the
form of statements statements that we are prepared to believe are statements of fact; in other words,
statements we believe to be true. We do not expect a database to be interpreted as asking questions or
giving orders. We expect it to be stating facts (or at least what are believed to be facts). As an aside, I must own up to the fact that some sentences that would be accepted as statements in English
don’t really pass the test as they stand. Here are two cases in point, from Shakespeare:
•“O for a muse of fire that would ascend the highest heaven of invention.”
•“To be or not to be that is the question.”
The first appears to lack a verb, but we know that “O for a …” is a poetical way of expressing a wish for
something on the part of the speaker, so we can paraphrase it fairly accurately by replacing “O” by “I
wish”, and the sentence thus revised passes the test. In the second case we have only to delete the word
“that”, whose presence serves only for emphasis (and scansion, of course!), and alter the punctuation
slightly: “It is true that ‘to be or not to be?’ is the question.”
Now, a statement is a sentence that is declarative in form: it declares something that is supposed to be true.
Example 3.3, “Student StudentId is enrolled on course CourseId”, is not a statement it does not pass the
test. It does, however, have the grammatical form of a statement. We can say that, like a statement, it is
declarative in form.
