The frequency response of a transfer function G(j􀈦) was introduced in the last chapter. As G(j􀈦)
is a complex number with a magnitude and argument (phase) if one wishes to show its behaviour
over a frequency range then one has 3 parameters to deal with the frequency, 􀈦, the magnitude,
M, and the phase 􀄳. Engineers use three common ways to plot the information, which are known
as Bode diagrams, Nyquist diagrams and Nichols diagrams in honour of the people who
introduced them. All portray the same information and can be readily drawn in MATLAB for a
system transfer function object G(s).
One diagram may prove more convenient for a particular application, although engineers often
have a preference. In the early days when computing facilities were not available Bode diagrams,
for example, had some popularity because of the ease with which they could, in many instances,
be rapidly approximated. All the plots will be discussed below, quoting many results without
going into mathematical detail, in the hope that the reader will obtain enough knowledge to know
whether MATLAB plots obtained are of the general shape expected.
A Bode diagram consists of two separate plots the magnitude, M, as a function of frequency and
the phase 􀄳 as a function of frequency. For both plots the frequency is plotted on a logarithmic
(log) scale along the x axis. A log scale has the property that the midpoint between two
frequencies 􀈦1 and 􀈦2 is the frequency 1 2 􀁚􀀠􀁚􀁚. A decade of frequency is from a value to
ten times that value and an octave from a value to twice that value. The magnitude is plotted
either on a log scale or in decibels (dB), where dB M 10 􀀠20log . The phase is plotted on a linear
scale. Bode showed that for a transfer function with no right hand side (rhs) s-plane zeros the
phase is related to the slope of the magnitude characteristic by the relationship
It can be further shown from this expression that a relatively good approximation is that the
phase at any frequency is 15° times the slope of the magnitude curve in dB/octave. This was a
useful concept to avoid drawing both diagrams when no computer facilities were available.
For two transfer functions G1 and G2 in series the resultant transfer function, G, is their product,
this means for their frequency response
which in terms of their magnitudes and phases can be written
Thus since a log scale is used on the magnitude of a Bode diagram this means Bode magnitude
plots for two transfer functions in series can be added, as also their phases on the phase diagram.
Hence a transfer function in zero-pole form can be plotted on the magnitude and phase Bode
diagrams simple by adding the individual contributions from each zero and pole. It is thus only
necessary to know the Bode plots of single roots and quadratic factors to put together Bode plots
for a complicated transfer function if it is known in zero-pole form.
The single pole transfer function is normally considered in time constant form with unit steady
state gain, that is
It is easy to show that this transfer function can be approximated by two straight lines, one
constant at 0 dB, as G(0) = 1, until the frequency, 1/T, known as the break point, and then from
that point by a line with slope -6dB/octave. The actual curve and the approximation are shown in
Figure 4.1 together with the phase curve. The differences between the exact magnitude curve and
the approximation are symmetrical, that is a maximum at the breakpoint of 3dB, 1dB one octave
each side of the breakpoint, 0.3 dB two octaves away etc. The phase changes between 0° and -
90° again with symmetry about the breakpoint phase of -45°. Note a steady slope of -6 dB/octave
has a corresponding phase of -90°
The Bode magnitude plot of a single zero time constant, that is
is simply a reflection in the 0 dB axis of the pole plot. That is the approximate magnitude curve is
flat at 0 dB until the break point frequency, 1/T, and then increases at 6 dB/octave. Theoretically
as the frequency tends to infinity so does its gain so that it is not physically realisable. The phase
curve goes from 0° to +90°
The transfer function of an integrator, which is a pole at the origin in the zero-pole plot, is 1/s. It
is sometimes taken with a gain K, i.e.K/s. Here K will be replaced by 1/T to give the transfer
function
On a Bode diagram the magnitude is a constant slope of -6 dB/octave passing through 0 dB at the
frequency 1/T. Note that on a log scale for frequency, zero frequency where the integrator has
infinite gain (the transfer function can only be produced electronically by an active device) is
never reached. The phase is -90° at all frequencies. A differentiator has a transfer function of sT
which gives a gain characteristic with a slope of 6 dB/octave passing through 0dB at a frequency
of 1/T. Theoretically it produces infinite gain at infinite frequency so again it is not physically
realisable. It has a phase of +90° at all frequencies.
The quadratic factor form is again taken for two complex poles with 􀈗 < 1 as in equation (3.7),
that is
Again G(0) = 1 so the response starts at 0 dB and can be approximated by a straight line at 0 dB
until 􀈦o and by a line from 􀈦o at -12 dB/octave. However, this is a very coarse approximation as
the behaviour around 􀈦o is highly dependent on 􀈗. It can be shown that the magnitude reaches a
maximum value of
which is approximately 1/2􀈗 for small 􀈗, at a frequency
of
This frequency is thus always less than 􀈦o and only exists for 􀈗 < 0.707.
The response with 􀈗 = 0.707 always has magnitude, M < 1. The phase curve goes from 0° to -
180° as expected from the original and final slopes of the magnitude curve, it has a phase shift of
-90° at the frequency 􀈦o independent of 􀈗 and changes more rapidly near 􀈦o for smaller 􀈗, as
expected due to the more rapid change in the slope of the corresponding magnitude curve.