Readers will appreciate that the concept of property is crucial for business. A firm needs to know
what it owns (and can therefore use freely, and/or charge others who want to use it), and what
belongs to others (so that if it needs to use those things it must do deals with their respective
owners). Business looks to law to define property rights and enable them to be enforced.
Before the IT revolution, the things over which firms needed to assert ownership were usually
tangible things – goods, land, and so forth. The law of “intellectual property”, under which for
instance a company might own a patent on a newly-devised industrial process, was a fairly
obscure legal backwater. Information technology has changed this, by hugely raising the profile
of intangibles. Ever since the Industrial Revolution, the economies of nations like Britain and the
USA had been dominated by manufacturing. But by the late 1980s, the share of GDP (gross
domestic product) attributable to manufacturing fell below half in both nations, and it has
continued to fall – outweighed partly by growth in services, but also by growth in trading of
intangibles.
By now, intangibles form a large proportion of the assets of a typical firm, as measured by the prices
which the market sets on them. Gordon Brown, then Chancellor of the Exchequer, said in 2006:
Twenty-five years ago the market value of our top companies was no more than the
value of just their physical assets. Today the market value of Britain’s top companies is
five times their physical assets, demonstrating the economic power of knowledge, ideas
and innovation.20
What Brown was saying was that most property of the “top companies” is now intellectual
property. It is largely IT which has brought about this change; and it naturally means that
intellectual property law has become a very significant area of business law, which is having to
develop in response to developments in the technology.
The topic which might perhaps come first to a student reader’s mind is the way that sharing
music over peer-to-peer networks has been undermining the copyrights owned by music
companies, which have been struggling either to invoke the law to defend their position, or to
develop novel business models that allow them to make money within the new technological
environment. But for present purposes, this area is not actually very significant. The law of
copyright as it applies to music is clear; the only change introduced by IT lies in making the law
easy to break and hard to enforce. More interesting, for this textbook, are areas where the
property itself (not just the means used to reproduce it or move it around) consists of things like
computer software or electronic databanks. In those areas, it is often far from clear how the
existing laws of intellectual property apply. Courts are adapting laws that were written long ago
for other purposes in order to develop an intellectual-property régime for the IT industry, and so
far this is not working too well.
The issues are not about enforcement – unlike with music filesharing, where many of the
individuals involved do not care whether their activity is legal, provided they feel safe from
detection! In civilized societies, most organizations by and large aim to keep within the law and
respect one another’s property rights – but they need to know what those rights are. It would be
hard for a business to be profitable, if it made a habit of not insisting on rights which it did
legally possess.
There are two longstanding legal devices for defining and protecting different sorts of intellectual
property: copyright, and patent. Copyright was originally introduced to define ownership in
“literary works”, such as novels, poems, or non-fiction books, but came to be extended by
analogy to things like musical compositions, films, and so forth. Patents relate to newly-invented
machines or industrial processes.
Neither copyright nor patent law was part of the Common Law; both devices were introduced by
statute. (Indeed, the USA has had a general law of copyright only since the 1890s – it was a
standing grievance for Victorian novelists that no sooner did the fruits of their labour emerge
from the press than American publishers’ agents would rush single copies across the Atlantic,
where they would be reprinted and sold without reward to the author.) The original motivation of
both copyright and patent law was the same: they were intended to stimulate advances (in literature,
and in industry) which would benefit society, by creating concrete incentives for the innovators.
The kinds of protection offered by the two areas of law are different. Copyright is something that
the author of a “literary work” acquires automatically in producing the work, and it forbids
anyone else to make a copy of the work (for a set number of years into the future, and with
various provisos that do not matter here) without the right-holder’s permission. Thus an author’s
copyright is a piece of property which he can sell or license for money; in the case of books,
typically a publishing company contracts with an author for permission to publish his book in
exchange for royalties paid to him on copies sold. With newer media such as films, the business
models are different, but the underlying law (which is what concerns us) is essentially the same.
A patent, on the other hand, is not acquired automatically by the inventor (or anyone else).
Taking out a patent is a complicated and expensive undertaking, but if a patent is granted, it
forbids anyone (again, for a set future period) from exploiting the process or mechanism without
the patent-holder’s permission; so again the patent is an economically-valuable piece of property,
which can be sold or licensed to companies wanting to use the innovation in their business.
The legal contrast between copyright and patent was neatly summed up by Tim Press:
A document setting out a novel chemical process would attract copyright protection, but
that protection would protect the document against copying, not the process from being
carried out. A patent for the process would prevent it from being carried out but not from
being written about or broadcast.21
Computer programs are “text” which defines and controls “processes”. So on the face of it there
is a question about which kind of intellectual-property protection is more relevant to software.
Over the years during which IT has been economically important, the answer has been shifting.